"General history, structure, and principles of law. The legal system, as an agency of social control; good business practices, and tool for change. The court systems, Constitution, torts, contracts, administrative agencies, and agency law.""Introduction to the basic concepts and procedures of financial accounting from a user perspective. The course examines the accounting cycle, business terminology, basic control procedures, and the preparation and evaluation of financial reports, with an emphasis on financial statement analysis.""Understanding of fixed and variable costs and their role in planning, control and performance evaluation.  Examination of alternative costing methods.  Making decisions by identifying and developing relevant information.  Development of spreadsheet skills."Interactive computer-based analysis of the accounting cycle including transactions and financial statements.  Preparation of journal entries and adjusting entries and completion of the closing process."Continuation of 215. Sales under the Uniform Commercial Code, negotiable instruments, secured transactions, property transactions, partnerships, and wills and estates.""Generation, communication and use of information to assist management with planning, control, and decision making in manufacturing and service organizations.  Includes cost concepts and relevance to decision situations, operational and capital budgeting, and performance evaluation.  Emphasis on developing effective teamwork skills as well as spreadsheet capabilities."Analysis of concepts and procedures underlying the automated accumulation and processing of accounting data. EDP internal control and audit techniques. Trends in accounting information systems."The conceptual framework of financial accounting. Communication of financial information on the income and retained earnings statements, statement of cash flows, and the balance sheet. Accounting concepts relating to current and operational assets of the firm. Identification of material differences between US GAAP and International Accounting Standards.""Financial accounting and reporting practices for business entities. Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) relative to firm liabilities, equity, income, taxes, employee benefits, leases, accounting changes and cash flows. Identification of material differences between US GAAP and International Accounting Standards .  Discussion of current issues in financial accounting.  Focus on written communication.""Business simulation focusing on generation and communication of information to assist management with financial decision-making. Emphasis on developing teamwork, written communication, and oral presentation skills.""Advanced accounting information systems concepts; database design and information retrieval, internal controls within computerized accounting information systems, financial reporting in an electronic environment.""Introduction to the fundamentals of federal income taxation and concepts applicable to all tax entities. Addresses issues related to the measurement and recognition of income, deductions, gains, and losses, taxation of property transactions, and basis / cost recovery concepts. Includes coverage of tax law policy objectives, tax implications of business and investment decisions, tax versus financial reporting treatment of common business transactions, and ethical issues related to tax compliance and planning.""Introduction to and field work in the preparation of individual income tax returns (state and federal). Basic coverage of filing and residency status, taxable income, exemptions, deductions, and credits. Tax software usage and online filing.""Accounting and financial reporting principles of local and state governments, including universities, schools, and hospitals.  In addition, accounting and financial reporting of non-profit organizations will be addressed.  Financial statements of local governmental units and the university are explored.""Accounting for business combinations and affiliated companies, intercompany transactions, and consolidated financial statements; Partnership accounting;  Segment and Interim Reporting;  Multinational accounting.""Financial reporting issues in a global environment, including introduction to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and the potential for the use of IFRS in the U.S. Accounting and managerial issues faced by multinational corporations. Technical issues such as transfer pricing, inflation accounting and taxation will be discussed.""The conceptual framework of auditing. Professional ethics. External reporting concepts. Audit methodology including risk analysis, internal control, procedures for gathering evidence and the role of statistical sampling in auditing.""Integrative studies in accounting. Development of critical thinking, ethical reasoning, professional research and teamwork skills. Written, visual, and oral communication with corporate stakeholders.""A general introduction to financial accounting information. Topics covered include the use and analysis of financial information, the regulatory environment, the role of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), and the use of the internet and electronic spreadsheets as a means of accessing and analyzing financial data."Decision analysis applied to managerial accounting issues. Generation of information for management decision making and control. Responsibility accounting and non-recurring decisions."Duties, structure, and functioning of top management teams and corporate boards of directors. CEO/board tenure and succession planning, top management compensation, board committee composition, assessment of CEO and board performance, theories of corporate governance, management of the corporate strategic agenda, governance codes, international governance, and chairman/CEO duality. Case studies and contemporary issues discussed.""Business simulation focusing on generation and communication of information to assist management with financial decision-making. Emphasis on developing teamwork, written communication, and oral presentation skills.""Advanced accounting information systems concepts; database design and information retrieval, internal controls within computerized accounting information systems, financial reporting in an electronic environment.""Integration of concepts from accounting, finance, and economics to determine how taxes affect business decisions. Provides students with a conceptual framework for thinking about business tax planning and applies it to various common business decisions.""Advanced coverage of federal taxation including issues related to the taxation of corporations, partnerships, estates and trusts, and their owners. Includes coverage of rules, concepts, background, and planning opportunities related to a number of common transactions involving these entities.""Introduction to and field work in the preparation of individual income tax returns (state and federal). Basic coverage of filing and residency status, taxable income, exemptions, deductions, and credits. Tax software usage and online filing.""Accounting and financial reporting principles of local and state governments, including universities, schools, and hospitals.  In addition, accounting and financial reporting of non-profit organizations will be addressed.  Financial statements of local governmental units and the university are explored."For students wishing to do individual research in a particular area of accounting."Principles and methodology of fraud detection and deterrence. Addresses the causes and elements of fraud, asset theft, corruption, financial statement mis-representation, internal controls for fraud prevention, investigative evidence gathering, and legal aspects of fraud.""Presentation and analysis of financial statement information from the point of view of the primary users of such data: owners and creditors. Topics include the financial reporting system, the primary financial statements, effects of accounting method choice on reported financial data, and firm valuation."Using financial statement analysis to value the firm. Topics covered include assessing how well a firm's financial statements reflect the economic effects of its resource management strategies and constructing proforma financial information that will serve as inputs to valuation models."Accounting for business combinations and affiliated companies, intercompany transactions, and consolidated financial statements; Partnership accounting;  Segment and Interim Reporting;  Multinational accounting.""Financial reporting issues in a global environment, including introduction to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and the potential for the use of IFRS in the U.S. Accounting and managerial issues faced by multinational corporations. Technical issues such as transfer pricing, inflation accounting and taxation will be discussed.""A study of advanced auditing and assurance issues. Topics include risk analysis, internal control, fraud detection, analytical procedures, evaluating operational and strategic objectives, and reporting and implementing audit findings.""Theoretical discussion of the financial accounting and reporting environment. The usefulness of financial accounting information for decision making. Current financial accounting issues, the financial accounting standard setting process,  FASB Standards Codification, and the role of the SEC in financial reporting."This course prepares students to complete their creative component project option in the Master of Accounting degree."Historical, social, economic and legal aspects of advertising. Evaluations of advertising research, media, strategy and appeals. Study of the creation of advertising.""The use of primary and secondary research for situations, organizations and the public.  Formation and development of strategic plans for public relations and advertising students.""Development and execution of creative advertising materials. Copywriting, art direction and computer applications. Creative strategy development, execution and evaluation.""Concepts of media planning and selection in the development, execution and evaluation of advertising campaigns. Characteristics and capabilities of the advertising media. Utilization of market segmentation, consumer buying and media audience databases.""Fundamentals of account management with emphasis on leadership, sales techniques, relationship building, presentation skills, and strategic thinking. Includes aspects of agency communications, team building, client management, evaluating creative concepts and media plans, and developing strategic proposals and campaign recommendations."Check with Greenlee School for course availability."Development of advertising campaigns for business and social institutions. Projects involve budgeting, media selection, market analysis, campaign strategy and creative execution."Preparation of materials for regional and national competitions."Advanced advertising writing and design. Emphasis on creative strategy, problem solving and execution of creative materials in print, broadcast and online media for a variety of clients."Seminars or one-time classes on topics of relevance to students in communication."Required of all Greenlee School majors. A 400-hour (for 3 credits) internship in the student's journalism and mass communication or advertising or public relations specialization. Assessment based on employer evaluations, student reports and faculty reviews. Available only to Greenlee School majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Initial, required internship. A 400-hour (for 3 credits) internship in the student's specialization. Assessment based on employer evaluations, student reports and faculty reviews. Available only to Greenlee School majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Optional internship in the student's specialization. Assessment based on employer evaluations, student reports and faculty reviews. Available only to Greenlee School majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to the College of Engineering and the Aerospace Engineering profession. Information concerning university, college, and department policies, procedures and resources with emphasis on the  Freshman Honors Program. Topics include experiential education study abroad opportunities, and department mentorships.""Introduction to developing intentional learners and worthy team members. Learning as the foundation of human enterprise; intellectual curiosity; ethics as a personal responsibility; everyday leadership; effective team and community interactions including team learning and the effects on individuals; and growth through understanding self, demonstrating ownership of own learning, and internalizing commitment to helping others. Intentional mental processing as a means of enhancing learning. Interconnectedness of the individual, the community, and the world."Solving aerospace engineering problems and presenting solutions through technical reports. Significant figures and estimation. SI units. Graphing and curve fitting. Introduction to aerospace engineering and engineering design. Spreadsheet programs. History of aerospace. Systems thinking. Team projects.Solving aerospace engineering problems and presenting solutions through technical reports. Significant figures. SI units and estimation. Graphing and curve fitting. Introduction to aerospace engineering and engineering design. Spreadsheet programs. History of aerospace. Systems thinking. Team projects."Computer solutions to aerospace engineering problems using the FORTRAN language and Matlab(R), with emphasis on numerical methods. Solid modeling with emphasis on aerospace design. Analysis of basic mathematical models and engineering problem solving. Written and oral technical reports, team projects.""Computer solutions to aerospace engineering problems using the FORTRAN language and Matlab(R), with emphasis on numerical methods. Solid modeling with emphasis on aerospace design. Analysis of basic mathematical models and engineering problem solving. Written and oral technical reports, team projects.""Experimental lab set-up, graphical skills. Academic program planning.""Experimental lab set-up, graphical skills. Academic program planning.""Introduction to aerospace disciplinary topics, including: aerodynamics, structures, propulsion, and flight dynamics with emphasis on performance. Written technical reports and team projects.""Engineering aspects of scientific balloon flights. Integration of science mission objectives with engineering requirements. Operations team certification. FAA and FCC regulations, communications, and command systems. Flight path prediction and control."Academic program planning.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Academic program planning.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course prior to commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Two hours of in-flight training and necessary ground instruction. Course content prescribed by the Aerospace Engineering  Department. Ten hours of flight training certified in a pilot log book can be considered by the course instructor as evidence of satisfactory performance in the course.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction to fluid mechanics and aerodynamics. Fluid properties and kinematics. Conservation equations in differential and integral form. Bernoulli's equation. Basic potential flow concepts and solutions. Boundary layer concept.  Incompressible flow over airfoils and wings. Examples of numerical methods. Applications of multi-variable calculus to fluid mechanics and aerodynamics."Review of thermodynamics, energy equation, compressible flow, and isentropic flow. Normal and oblique shocks. Mach waves and expansion fans. Applications to ducts and nozzles. Compressible airfoil and wing theory.  Introduction to advanced compressible flow topics.""Introduction to elasticity, airworthiness, and flight loads. Introduction to fatigue. Materials selection for flight applications. Thin walled cross-sections under bending, torsion, and shear loads using classical methods. Shear center. Column buckling. Matrix methods of structural analysis."Design of experiments. Data analysis. Strain gage installation. Measurement of stiffness/strength of aluminum. Analysis/fabrication/testing of riveted joints. Shear/bending measurements inbeam sections. Analysis/measurement of strains in frames. Buckling of columns. Stress concentration. Vibration testing of beams and plates. Fabrication/testing of composites.Linear system analysis. Control system designs using root-locus and frequency response methods. Applications in flight control systems.Similitude and dimensional analysis. Measurement uncertainty analysis. Pressure and velocity measurement methods and instruments. Pressure distribution around a circular cylinder. Aerodynamic performance of low-speed airfoils. Airfoil wake flow; Boundary layer flow. Flow visualization techniques for supersonic flows and de Laval nozzles."Introduction to astrodynamics. Two-body motion. Geocentric, lunar and interplanetary trajectories and applications. Launch and atmospheric re-entry trajectories.""Aircraft rigid body equations of motion, linearization, and modal analysis. Longitudinal and lateral-directional static and dynamic stability analysis. Flight handling characteristics analysis. Longitudinal and lateral-directional open loop response to aircraft control inputs. Aircraft flight handling qualities.""Advanced programming, workstation environment, and development of computational tools for aerospace analysis and design. Technical report writing.""Emphasis on impact of component interfaces in aerospace systems. Understand how changes in variables associated with individual components impact the performance of the aerospace system. Specific integration challenges include: capturing implicit disciplinary interactions (e.g. structures/aerodynamics, propulsion/aerodynamics, etc.), propagating tolerances through the system (i.e. uncertainty modeling), balancing component attributes in the system objective.""Basic introduction to the fundamentals of Wind Energy and Wind Energy conversion systems. Topics include but not limited to various types of wind energy conversion systems and the aerodynamics, blade and tower structural loads, kinematics of the blades and meteorology."Academic program planning.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Academic program planning.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Summer professional work period. Students must register for this course prior to commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Students must register for this course prior to commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Professional work period, one semester maximum per academic year."Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course prior to commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Atmospheric propulsion system performance and cycle analysis. Momentum theorem, thrust and propulsive efficiency. Thermodynamics of compressible flow with heat and work addition. Components and principles of turbojets and turbofans. Rocket engines and ramjet principles."Electricity and magnetism. Plasma physics. Ion engine performance. Introduction to advanced electromagnetic propulsion systems. Energy sources and nuclear propulsion. Space mission requirements."Introduction to fundamental concepts for force, displacement, stress and strain measurements for structures and materials applications.  Strain gage theory and application.  Full field deformation measurements with laser interferometry and digital image processing.  Advanced experimental concepts at the micro- and nano-scale regimes.  Selected laboratory experiments.""Analysis of indeterminate flight structures including finite element laboratory. Static analysis of complex structural components subject to thermal and aerodynamic loads. Analytical and finite element solutions for stresses and displacements of membrane, plane stress, plate structures. Buckling of beams, frames, and plate structures. Introduction to vibration of flight structures. Steady state and transient structural response using normal modal analysis.""Vibration theory. Steady and unsteady flows. Mathematical foundations of aeroelasticity, static and dynamic aeroelasticity.  Linear unsteady aerodynamics, non-steady aerodynamics of lifting surfaces. Stall flutter. Aeroelastic problems in civil engineering structures. Aeroelastic problems of rotorcraft. Experimental aeroelasticity. Selected wind tunnel laboratory experiments.""Fabrication, testing and analysis of composite materials used in flight structures. Basic laminate theory of beams, plates and shells. Manufacturing and machining considerations of various types of composites. Testing of composites for material properties, strength and defects. Student projects required.""Detailed design and analysis of aerospace vehicle structures. Material selection, strength, durability and damage tolerance, and validation analysis. Design for manufacturability."Aircraft lateral directional stability augmentation. Launch vehicle pitch control system design. Control of flexible vehicles. Satellite attitude control. Flight control designs based on state-space methods. Introduction to sample-data systems.Three-dimensional rotational kinematics and attitude dynamics of a rigid body in space.  Stability analysis of a spinning spacecraft with or without energy dissipation.  Attitude dynamics and stability of a satellite in circular orbit.  Introduction to spacecraft attitude determination and control systems (ADCS).  Simulation of spacecraft attitude-dynamics and control problems of practical interest using MATLAB."Introduction to the aerodynamics, performance, stability, control and critical maneuvering characteristics of V/STOL vehicles. Topics include hovercrafts, jet flaps, ducted fans and thrust vectored engines.""Introduction to computational fluid dynamics. Discretization, consistency, and stability. Explicit and implicit methods for ordinary and partial differential equations. Linearization techniques. Iterative and direct solution algorithms. Numerical methods for parabolic, elliptic and hyperbolic equations. Curvilinear coordinates and numerical grid generation. Applications to Euler, boundary-layer and Navier-Stokes equations."Applications of principles of fluid mechanics and thermodynamics in performance analysis and design of turbomachines. Conceptual and preliminary design of axial and radial flow compressors and turbines using velocity triangles and through-flow approaches."Orbit determination and prediction using Gibb's and Gauss' methods. Advanced orbit maneuvers, triple-, and fixed-impulse; universal variables; Kepler's problem. Earth gravity field models and gravity harmonics, orbit perturbations, advanced dynamics, variational methods, relative orbital mechanics, and Clohessy-Wiltshire equations.""Introduction to modern engineering design methodology. Computational constrained optimal design approach including selection of objective function, characterization of constraint system, materials and strength considerations, and sensitivity analyses.""Fundamental principles used in engineering design of aircraft, missile, and space systems. Preliminary design of aerospace vehicles. Engineering Ethics.""Introduction to the theory and methods of Multidisciplinary Design Optimization (MDO), including system coupling, system sensitivity methods, decomposition methods, MDO formulations (such as multi-discipline feasible (MDF), individual discipline feasible (IDF) and all-at-once (AAO) approaches, and MDO search methods.""An examination of spacecraft systems including attitude determination and control, power, thermal control, communications, propulsion, guidance, navigation, command and data handling, and mechanisms. Explanation of space and operational environments as they impact spacecraft design. Includes discussion of safety, reliability, quality, maintainability, testing, cost, legal, and logistics issues.""Application of team design concepts to projects of a multidisciplinary nature. Concurrent treatment of design, manufacturing and life cycle considerations. Application of design tools such as CAD, CAM and FEM. Design methodologies, project scheduling, cost estimating, quality control, manufacturing processes. Development of a prototype and appropriate documentation in the form of written reports, oral presentations, computer models and engineering drawings.""Build and test of a conceptual design. Detail design, manufacturability, test criteria and procedures. Application of design tools such as CAD and CAM and manufacturing techniques such as rapid prototyping. Development and testing of a full-scale prototype with appropriate documentation in the form of design journals, written reports, oral presentations and computer models and engineering drawings.""Introduction to the theoretical foundation and methods associated with the design for large-scale complex engineered systems, including objective function formation, design reliability, value-driven design, product robustness, utility theory, economic factors for the formation of a value function and complexity science as a means of detecting unintended consequences in the product behavior.""Introduction to stress/strain, HookeÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s law, and elastic wave propagation in two dimensions in isotropic media. Ultrasonic plane-wave reflection and transmission; and simple straight-crested guided waves. Transducer construction, behavior, and performance. Simple signal analysis and discrete signal processing. The last few weeks of the course are devoted to case studies.""Advanced topics in wind energy, emphasis on current practices. Theoretical foundations for horizontal and vertical axis wind turbine. Design codes for energy conversion systems design, aerodynamic and structural load estimation, wind resource characterization wind farm design, optimization."Academic program planning.Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Development of aerospace principles and concepts through individual research and projects. Written report."Theory of stress and strain, stress-strain relationships. Unsymmetrical bending, curved beams, shear center. Torsion of thin-walled noncircular sections. Equilibrium, compatibility equations. Airy stress functions. Membrane stresses in shells, thick-walled cylinders.""Fundamental concepts for force, displacement, stress, and strain measurements. Strain gages. Full field deformation measurements with laser interferometry and digital image processing. Advanced experimental concepts at the micro and nano scale regimes."Analysis of static stresses and deformation in continuous aircraft structures. Various analytical and approximate methods of analysis of isotropic and anisotropic plates and shells."Composite constituent materials, micro-mechanics, laminate analysis, hygro-thermal analysis, composite failure, joining of composites, design of composite beams and plates, honeycomb core, manufacturing of composites, short fiber composites, and demonstration laboratory.""Introduction to modern mesh generation techniques. Structured and unstructured mesh methods, algebraic and PDE methods, elliptic and hyperbolic methods, variational methods, error analysis, Delaunay triangulation, data structures, geometric modeling with B-spline and NURBS surfaces, surface meshing.""Variational and weighted residual approach to finite element equations. Emphasis on two- and three-dimensional problems in solid mechanics. Isoparametric element formulation, higher order elements, numerical integration, imposition of constraints and penalty, convergence, and other more advanced topics. Use of two- and three-dimensional computer programs. Dynamic and vibrational problems, eigenvalues, and time integration. Introduction to geometric and material nonlinearities."Applications of classical and modern linear control theory to automatic control of flight vehicles. Spacecraft attitude control. Control of flexible vehicles. Linear-quadratic regulator design applications."Thermodynamics of compressible flow. Viscous and inviscid compressible flow equations. One dimensional steady flow; isentropic flow, shocks, expansions. Multidimensional compressible flow aspects. Linear and nonlinear wave analysis and method of characteristics. Subsonic, transonic, supersonic and hypersonic flows.""Kinematics and dynamics of fluid flow. Derivation of the Navier-Stokes, Euler and potential flow equations. Introduction to generalized curvilinear coordinates. Ideal fluids. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional potential flow. Complex variable methods.""Similitude and dimensional analysis. Measurement uncertainty analysis; Fluid mechanical apparatus: wind tunnel and water tunnels. Various experimental techniques widely used for fluid mechanics, aerodynamics, heat transfer, and combustion studies: Pressure gauge and transducers; Pitot tube; hot wire anemometry; Shadowgraph and Schlieren Photography; laser Doppler velocimetry; particle image velocimetry (PIV); advanced PIV techniques (stereo PIV, 3-D PIV, Tomographic PIV, Holograph PIV and microscopic PIV); laser induced fluorescence; pressure sensitive painting, temperature sensitive painting; molecular tagging velocimetry; molecular tagging thermometry. Extensive applications and laboratory experiments will be included.""Basic concepts of discretization, consistency, and stability. Explicit and implicit methods for ordinary differential equations. Methods for each type of partial differential equation.  Iterative solution methods; curvilinear grids. Students will program basic algorithms.""Application of computational methods to current problems in fluid mechanics and heat transfer. Methods for solving the Navier-Stokes and reduced equation sets such as the Euler, boundary layer, and parabolized forms of the conservation equations. Introduction to relevant aspects of grid generation and turbulence modeling."Review of 2-body problem. Orbital maneuvers. Relative motion in orbit. Orbit perturbation analysis. Gravity field expansions and effects on orbiters. 3-body problem with applications."Principles of guidance systems for spacecraft, launch vehicles, homing and ballistic missiles. Optimal guidance. Interplanetary transfer guidance with low thrust. Principles of inertial navigation. Theory and applications of the Global Positioning System. Celestial navigation procedures. Application of Kalman filtering to recursive navigation theory.""Introduction to the theory and methods of Multidisciplinary Design Optimization (MDO), including system coupling, system sensitivity methods, decomposition methods, MDO formulations (such as multi-discipline feasible (MDF), individual discipline feasible (IDF) and all-at-once (AAO) approaches, and MDO search methods.""Materials and mechanics approach to fracture and fatigue. Fracture mechanics, brittle and ductile fracture, fracture and fatigue characteristics, fracture of thin films and layered structures. Fracture and fatigue tests, mechanics and materials designed to avoid fracture or fatigue.""Introduction to organized multidisciplinary approach to designing and developing systems. Concepts, principles, and practice of systems engineering as applied to large integrated systems. Life cycle costing, scheduling, risk management, functional analysis, conceptual and detail design, test and evaluation, and systems engineering planning and organization.   Not available for degrees in industrial engineering."Avionics functions. Applications of systems engineering principles to avionics. Top down design of avionics systems. Automated design tools."Introduction to the theoretical foundation and methods associated with the design for large-scale complex engineered systems, including objective function formation, design reliability, value-driven design, product robustness, utility theory, economic factors for the formation of a value function and complexity science as a means of detecting unintended consequences in the product behavior."Mechanics of fiber-reinforced materials. Micromechanics of lamina. Macromechanical behavior of lamina and laminates. Strength and interlaminar stresses of laminates. Failure criteria. Stress analysis of laminates. Thermal moisture and residual stresses. Joints in composites."Atmospheric circulations, atmospheric boundary layer wind, bluff-body aerodynamics, aeroelastic phenomena, wind-tunnel and full-scale testing, wind-load code and standards, effect of tornado and thunderstorm winds, design applications.""Qualitative features of turbulence. Statistical representation of turbulent velocity fields: averages, moments, correlations, length and time scales and the energy cascade. Averaged equations of motion, closure requirements, Reynolds averaged models. Homogeneous shear flows, free shear flows, boundary layers. Numerical simulation of turbulence: DNS, LES, DES."Elementary notions of probability. Random processes. Autocorrelation and spectral functions. Estimation of spectrum from finite data. Response of linear systems to random inputs. Discrete and continuous Kalman filter theory and applications. Smoothing and prediction. Linearization of nonlinear dynamics."The optimal control problem. Variational approach. Pontryagin's principle, Hamilton-Jacobi equation. Dynamic programming. Time-optimal, minimum fuel, minimum energy control systems. The regulator problem. Structures and properties of optimal controls.""Introduction to modern robust control. Model and signal uncertainty in control systems. Uncertainty description. Stability and performance robustness to uncertainty. Solutions to the H2, Hoo, and l1 control problems. Tools for robustness analysis and synthesis.""Sampled data, discrete data, and the z-transform. Design of digital control systems using transform methods: root locus, frequency response and direct design methods. Design using state-space methods. Controllability, observability, pole placement, state estimators. Digital filters in control systems. Microcomputer implementation of digital filters. Finite wordlength effects. Linear quadratic optimal control in digital control systems. Simulation of digital control systems."Linear algebra review. Least square method and singular value decomposition. State space modeling of linear continuous-time systems. Solution of linear systems. Controllability and observability. Canonical description of linear equations. Stability of linear systems. State feedback and pole placements. Observer design for linear systems.Linear vs nonlinear systems. Phase plane analysis. Bifurcation and center manifold theory. Lyapunov stability. Absolute stability of feedback systems. Input-output stability. Passivity theory and feedback linearization. Nonlinear control design techniques.Mathematical perturbation methods with applications to ordinary and partial differential equations. Perturbation expansions. Order of magnitude and gauge functions. Matched asymptotic expansions. Boundary layer problems. Multiple scales. Resonance and mode coupling. Solvability conditions for differential equations. Physical and engineering applications.Presentation of professional topics by department graduate students. Development of presentation skills used in a professional conference setting involving question and answer format."Theoretical methods of stability analysis; linear analysis of exchange of stability and over stability; bifurcation of equilibria; most dangerous modes and pattern formation; shear flow stability theorems. Physical mechanisms. Tollmein-Schlichting waves, disintegration of capillary jets, Benard convection, Taylor-Couette flow, centrifugal instability, double diffusion."An examination of current methods in computational fluid dynamics. Differencing strategies. Advanced solution algorithms for unstructured meshes.  Grid generation. Construction of higher-order CFD algorithms. Parallel computing. Current applications. Use of state of the art CFD codes.One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."An interdisciplinary introduction to the study of African American culture. Includes history, the social sciences, literature, religion, and the arts, as well as conceptual frameworks for investigation and analysis of the African American experience.""Origins and distribution of peoples of Africa; geographical characteristics as related to culture types, including early civilizations; a comparative examination of economic, subsistence, language, social and political organization, and religious systems throughout the continent; change processes, the impact of colonialism, and the nature of contemporary African societies.""Analysis of ethnic and race relations, particularly in America; emphasis on the sociology and psychology of race and ethnic relations.""Examination of African-American experience from the perspective of black religion with attention to political, economic, social, theological and artistic expressions, including music, that serve the life of African-American communities.Ì¢‰âÂåù.""Literature by African Americans, which may include study of individual authors, movements, themes, genres.""Economic, social, political and cultural roles of Women of Color in the U.S. Includes literary, philosophical, and artistic expressions. Myths and realities explored.""Examines African roots of black culture and the African American experience in the United States from the colonial period through the Civil War. Topics include Atlantic Slave Trade, slavery and American identity, abolition, the emergence of Black Nationalism, and black participation in the Civil War.""Explores African American political thought and political action from Reconstruction to the present. Topics include rise of Jim Crow segregation, urban migration, Garvey movement, Harlem Renaissance, Depression and world wars, Pan-Africanism, civil rights, Black Power, and black feminism.""Intensive study of a selected topic in African-American Studies in one or more disciplines. Selected readings of various authors, movements, eras, or genres. Primary and secondary source materials.""Comparative history of the civil rights and ethnic power movements (African American, Chicano, American Indian, Puerto Rican, among others) in the U.S. from World War II to the present. Topics include institutional foundations, leadership, gender and racial dynamics, and the convergences and divergences of these differing ethnic struggles for rights.""Laboratory-based, team-oriented experiences in a spectrum of topics common to the practice of agricultural and biosystems engineering. Report writing, co-ops, internships, careers, registration planning.""Engineering approach to problem solution and presentation in the context of real world problems. Introduction to basic principles from statics, projectile motion, conservation of mass and energy and electricity and magnetism. Use of spreadsheet programs and computer programming language(s) to solve and present engineering problems. Introduction to interfacing computers to sensor systems for data collection.""Applications of multi-view drawings and dimensioning. Techniques for visualizing, analyzing, and communicating 3-D geometries. Application of the design process including written and oral reports.""8 week course. Professionalism in the context of the engineering/technical workplace. Development and demonstration of key workplace competencies: teamwork, initiative, communication, and engineering/technical knowledge. Resumes; Cover Letters; Behavioral Based Interviewing; Industry Speakers; Preparation for internships experiences.""Application of mathematics and engineering sciences to mass and energy balances in agricultural and biological systems. Emphasis is on solving engineering problems in the areas of heat and mass transfer, air and water vapor systems; animal production systems, grain systems; food systems, hydrologic systems, and bioprocessing.""Project management - critical path, Gantt charts, resource allocations, basic project budgeting, and project management software. Engineering design approaches. Open-ended design projects to demonstrate the preceding principles through application of technical concepts taught in prerequisite coursework.""8 week-course. Creating, editing, and documenting part and assembly models using Solidworks.""8 week-course. Applications of  Creo Parametric software. Create solid models of parts and assemblies. Utilize the solid models to create design documentation (standard drawing views, dimensions, and notes) and for the geometric analysis of parts and assemblies.""8-week course. Application of 2-D AutoCAD software to create and interpret 2-D drawings and 3-D models of facilities. Topics include geometric construction, design documentation: (using views, dimension, notes), and AutoCAD specific features (i.e. Layers, Blocks, Standards, Styles)."First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work.Computer aided solution of agricultural engineering problems by use of numerical techniques and mathematical models. Systems analysis and optimization applicable to agricultural and biological systems."Converting biorenewable resources into bioenergy and biobased products. Biorenewable concepts as they relate to drivers of change, feedstock production, processes, products, co-products, economics, and transportation/logistics.""Principles of operation, design, selection, testing and evaluation of agricultural field machinery and systems. Functional and mechanical performances. Crop and soil interaction with machines. Machine systems, including land preparation, crop establishment, crop protection, harvesting and post-harvest, materials handling systems.""Thermodynamic principles and construction of tractor engines. Fuels, combustion, and lubrication. Kinematics and dynamics of tractor power applications; drawbar, power take-off and traction mechanisms.""Single phase and three phase circuit design. Electrical safety. Electric motors and controls. Programmable logic controllers. Digital logic, instrumentation and sensors.""Unit-operation analysis of biological systems, through the study of mass, energy, and information transport in bioresource production and conversion systems. Quantification and modeling of biomass production, ecological interactions, and bioreactor operations.""Multi-disciplinary approach to sustainable engineering and international development, sustainable development, appropriate design and engineering, feasibility analysis, international aid, business development, philosophy and politics of technology, and ethics in engineering. Engineering-based projects from problem formulation through implementation. Interactions with partner community organizations or international partners such as nongovernment organizations (NGOs). Course readings, final project/design report."Summer professional work period.One semester maximum per academic year professional work period.Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Modeling dynamic systems with ordinary differential equations. Introduction to state variable methods of system analysis. Analysis of mechanical, electrical, and fluid power systems. Analytical and numerical solutions of differential equations. Introduction to classical control theory. Feedback and stability examined in the s domain. Frequency response as an analytical and experimental tool. MATLAB will be used throughout the course for modeling. Individual and/or group projects required for graduate credit.""Interfacing techniques for computer-based data acquisition and control systems. Basic interfacing components including A/D and D/A conversion, signal filtering, multiplexing, and process control. Sensors and theory of operation applied to practical monitoring and control problems. Individual and group projects required for graduate credit.""Introduction to fundamental concepts and applications of GIS in natural resources management with specific focus on watersheds. Topics include: basic GIS technology, data structures, database management, spatial analysis, and modeling; visualization and display of natural resource data. Case studies in watershed and natural resource management using ArcView GIS.""System architecture and design of electronics used in agricultural machinery and production systems. Emphasis on information technology and systems integration for automated agriculture processes. Design of Controller Area Network (CAN BUS) communication systems and discussion of relevant standards (ISO 11783 and SAE J1939). Application of technologies for sensing, distribution control, and automation of agricultural machinery will be emphasized."Properties of hydraulic fluids. Performance parameters of fixed and variable displacement pumps and motors. Hydraulic circuits and systems. Hydrostatic transmissions. Characteristics of control valves. Analysis and design of hydraulic systems for power and control functions.Identification of current design problems in ag & biosystems engineering. Development of alternate solutions using creativity and engineering analysis and synthesis techniques.Selection of promising solutions to design problems identified in 415 for development by design teams. Presentation of designs through oral and written reports and prototypes."8 week course. Review of core concepts covered in the Fundamentals of Engineering examination with emphasis on statics, dynamics, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, electric circuits, and engineering economics. Open to all College of Engineering seniors, however focus is on the general exam, not discipline specific exams."1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E."Hydrology and hydraulics in agricultural and urbanizing watersheds.  Design and evaluation of systems for the conservation and quality preservation of soil and water resources.   Use and analysis of hydrologic data in engineering design; relationship of topography, soils, crops, climate, and cultural practices in conservation and quality preservation of soil and water for agriculture.  Small watershed hydrology, water movement and utilization in the soil-plant-atmosphere system, agricultural water management, best management practices, and agricultural water quality.""Characteristics and courses of non-point source (NPS) pollution in agricultural and urban watersheds, computer modeling and NPS pollution for terrestrial and aquatic systems, strategies to control and manage NPS pollution of water bodies, total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) and integrated watershed management. Graduate students are required to review research papers and develop/deliver lecture models on assigned topics.""Development of monitoring systems that support effective planning, performance evaluation, modeling, or environmental impact assessment of soil-, water-, and waste-management systems.  Typical soil and water pollutants and physical, chemical, and biological characteristics that affect sample location and timing. Sample collection, documentation, chain-of-custody, and quality assurance procedures.  In addition to other assignments, graduate students will prepare several research literature reviews on topics covered in the class and develop monitoring plans.""Application of engineering principles and mathematical modeling to the quantitative analysis of food and bioprocessing systems. Physical/chemical characteristics of foods and biological systems, flow processes, thermal processes and separation processes. Term paper required for graduate credit.""Application of team design concepts to projects of a multidisciplinary nature. Concurrent treatment of design, manufacturing and life cycle considerations. Application of design tools such as CAD, CAM and FEM. Design methodologies, project scheduling, cost estimating, quality control, manufacturing processes. Development of a prototype and appropriate documentation in the form of written reports, oral presentations, computer models and engineering drawings.""Cereal grain and oilseed properties, quality measurement, processing, and end-use value. Design of drying systems using computer simulation. Corn wet and dry milling. Soybean oil extraction. Grain handling systems.""Principles and design of animal environmental control systems. Insulation, heat and mass transfer, fans, ventilation,  air distribution, heating and cooling equipment, and controls. Individual and group projects required for graduate credit.""Application of engineering fundamentals to the independent solution of an animal production systems engineering problem with well defined criteria and constraints in either environmental control, structural design, manure management, or air quality/mitigation.""Design of light-framed wood structures using LRFD and ASD design procedures. Includes analysis of wind, snow, dead, and live loads. Applications include animal housing and machine storage. Fasteners, laminated posts, truss design and use of National Design Specifications."Systems-level engineering analysis of biological systems. Economic and life-cycle analysis of bioresource production and conversion systems. Global energy and resource issues and the role of biologically derived materials in addressing these issues.Independent Study.Independent Study.Independent study.Independent study in environmental bioprocessing engineering.Independent study in food engineering.Independent study in general A B E topics.Guided instructing in agricultural and biosystems engineering for honors students.Guided instruction in land and water resources engineering.Guided instruction in advance machinery systems engineering."Preparation for, or follow-up of, study abroad experience (496). For preparation, course focuses on understanding the tour destination through readings, discussions, and research on topics such as the regional industries, climate, crops, culture, economics, food, geography, government, history, natural resources, and public policies. For follow-up, course focuses on presentations by students, report writing, and reflection. Students enrolled in this course intend to register for 496 the following term or have had taken 496 the previous term.""Tour and study at international sites relevant to disciplines of industrial technology, biological systems engineering, agricultural systems technology, and agricultural engineering. Location and duration of tours will vary. Trip expenses paid by students. Pre-trip preparation and/or post-trip reflection and reports arranged through 495."Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Introduction to the science and engineering of converting biorenewable resources into bioenergy and biobased products. Survey of biorenewable resource base and properties; description of biobased products; methods of biorenewable resource production; processing technologies for fuels, chemicals, materials, and energy; environmental impacts; economics of biobased products and bioenergy.""Modeling dynamic systems with ordinary differential equations. Introduction to state variable methods of system analysis. Analysis of mechanical, electrical, and fluid power systems. Analytical and numerical solutions of differential equations. Introduction to classical control theory. Feedback and stability examined in the s domain. Frequency response as an analytical and experimental tool. MATLAB will be used throughout the course for modeling. Individual and/or group projects required for graduate credit.""Interfacing techniques for computer-based data acquisition and control systems. Basic interfacing components including A/D and D/A conversion, signal filtering, multiplexing, and process control. Sensors and theory of operation applied to practical monitoring and control problems. Individual and group projects required for graduate credit.""Applications of biologically inspired computational intelligence tools for data mining, system modeling, and optimization for agricultural, biological and other engineered systems. Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks, Support Vector Machines, Fuzzy Logic, Genetic Algorithms, Bayesian and Decision Tree learning. Fundamental Machine Vision techniques will be introduced in the first part of course and be integrated into the lab exercises for learning different computational intelligence techniques. MATLAB will be used throughout the course for algorithm implementation.""Introduction to fundamental concepts and applications of GIS in natural resources management with specific focus on watersheds. Topics include: basic GIS technology, data structures, database management, spatial analysis, and modeling; visualization and display of natural resource data. Case studies in watershed and natural resource management using ArcView GIS.""System architecture and design of electronics used in agricultural machinery and production systems. Emphasis on information technology and systems integration for automated agriculture processes. Design of Controller Area Network (CAN BUS) communication systems and discussion of relevant standards (ISO 11783 and SAE J1939). Application of technologies for sensing, distribution control, and automation of agricultural machinery will be emphasized.""Methods to maintain productivity and minimize the negative ecological effects of agricultural systems by understanding nutrient cycles, managing manure and crop residue, and utilizing multispecies interactions. Crop and livestock production within landscapes and watersheds is also considered. Course includes a significant field component, with student teams analyzing Iowa farms."1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E."Hydrology and hydraulics in agricultural and urbanizing watersheds.  Design and evaluation of systems for the conservation and quality preservation of soil and water resources.   Use and analysis of hydrologic data in engineering design; relationship of topography, soils, crops, climate, and cultural practices in conservation and quality preservation of soil and water for agriculture.  Small watershed hydrology, water movement and utilization in the soil-plant-atmosphere system, agricultural water management, best management practices, and agricultural water quality.""Characteristics and courses of non-point source (NPS) pollution in agricultural and urban watersheds, computer modeling and NPS pollution for terrestrial and aquatic systems, strategies to control and manage NPS pollution of water bodies, total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) and integrated watershed management. Graduate students are required to review research papers and develop/deliver lecture models on assigned topics.""Soil erosion processes, soil loss equations and their application to conservation planning, sediment properties, initiation of sediment motion and over land flow, flow in alluvial channels and theory of sediment transport, channel stability, reservoir sedimentation, wind erosion, BMPs for controlling erosion.""Development of monitoring systems that support effective planning, performance evaluation, modeling, or environmental impact assessment of soil-, water-, and waste-management systems.  Typical soil and water pollutants and physical, chemical, and biological characteristics that affect sample location and timing. Sample collection, documentation, chain-of-custody, and quality assurance procedures.  In addition to other assignments, graduate students will prepare several research literature reviews on topics covered in the class and develop monitoring plans.""A project-based course to develop a water quality improvement plan. The legislative and judicial basis of the Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) program, different approaches for TMDL development, data needs and sources, SWAT modeling, and principles and techniques for implementation of water quality improvement plans.""Application of engineering principles and mathematical modeling to the quantitative analysis of food and bioprocessing systems. Physical/chemical characteristics of foods and biological systems, flow processes, thermal processes and separation processes. Term paper required for graduate credit.""Cereal grain and oilseed preservation, quality measurement, and end-use value. Design of drying systems using computer simulation. Corn wet and dry milling. Soybean oil extraction. Grain handling systems. Individual and group projects required for graduate credit.""Principles and design of animal environmental control systems. Insulation, heat and mass transfer, fans, ventilation,  air distribution, heating and cooling equipment, and controls. Individual and group projects required for graduate credit.""Design of light-framed wood structures using LRFD and ASD design procedures. Includes analysis of wind, snow, dead, and live loads. Applications include animal housing and machine storage. Fasteners, laminated posts, truss design and use of National Design Specifications."Systems-level engineering analysis of biological systems.  Economic and life-cycle analysis of bioresource production and conversion systems.  Global energy and resource issues and the role of biologically derived materials in addressing these issues. Students enrolled in ABE 580 will be required to answer additional exam questions and report on two journal articles.Guided instruction and self-study on special topics relevant to agricultural and biosystems engineering."A technical paper draft based on the M.S. thesis or creative component is required of all master's students. This paper must be in a form that satisfies the requirements of some specific journal and be ready for submission. A technical presentation based on M.S. thesis or creative component is required of all master's students. This presentation must be in a form that satisfies the normal presentation requirements of a professional society. The presentation itself (oral or poster) may be made at a professional society meeting or at any international, regional, state, or university conference/event as long as the presentation content and form conforms to normal expectations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Creative Component."Keys to starting a good MS thesis or PhD dissertation project. Learning how to formulate research problems. Discussion of broader impact, review of literature, identifying knowledge gaps and needs, long-term goals, research hypotheses, objectives, rationale and significance, and approaches for accomplishing research objectives. Preparation and communication of research proposal and project in different formats. Using peer review and responding to feedback.""Historical, biophysical, socioeconomic, and ethical dimensions of agricultural sustainability. Strategies for evaluating existing and emerging agricultural systems in terms of the core concepts of sustainability and their theoretical contexts."Advanced topics.Graduate student experience in the agricultural and biosystems engineering departmental teaching program.One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period."A technical paper draft based on the dissertation is required of all Ph.D. students. This paper must be in a form that satisfies the requirements of some specific journal and be ready for submission. A technical presentation based on the dissertation is required of all Ph.D. students. This presentation must be in a form that satisfies the normal presentation requirements of a professional society. The presentation itself (oral or poster) may be made at a professional society meeting or at any international, regional, state, or university conference/event as long as the presentation content and form conforms to normal expectations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Research.Guided graduate research in biosystems engineering.Guided graduate research in computer-aided design.Guided graduate research in environmental systems.Guided graduate research in food engineering.Guided graduate research in occupational safety.Guided graduate research in power and machinery engineering.Guided graduate research in structures.Guided graduate research in process engineering.Guided graduate research in environment and natural resources.Guided graduate research in waste management.Orientation to the department. Careers in agriculture.Orientation to the department. Careers in agriculture.Orientation to the department. Careers in agriculture.Orientation to the department. Careers in agriculture."Introduction to leadership in agriculture and the life sciences, problem solving applied to current case studies, global perspective required by leaders, and designing programs to respond to societal  needs in the agricultural and life sciences."The scientific basis of biological and social sciences in agriculture."Course provides career skills, learning strategies and social and academic integration techniques to student members of Step Forward Learning Community. Utilization of campus resources, encouragement of self-exploration, and development of academic skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Field experience in a formal education setting designed to explore teaching as a career through guided observation and interviews, reflection, and on-campus dialogue.""Forty hours on-site in an agricultural setting. Students will have an opportunity outside the classroom for career guidance, role modeling, and reflection on their observations that they can apply to their courses and other educational experiences.""Forty hours on-site in an agricultural setting. Students will have an opportunity outside the classroom for career guidance, role modeling, and reflection on their observations that they can apply to their courses and other educational experiences.""Forty hours on-site in an agricultural setting. Students will have an opportunity outside the classroom for career guidance, role modeling, and reflection on their observations that they can apply to their courses and other educational experiences."Overview of career opportunities. Evaluation of interests and accomplishments and setting career goals. Development of job search and interviewing skills. Establishing networks of job contacts."Historical development of agricultural education programs. Philosophic premises, program goals and objectives. Educational and social issues impacting the implementation of agricultural education programs.""Utilizing instructional methods, techniques, and problem solving, presentation and sales strategies with agricultural audiences.""A planned learning experience wherein each student and faculty mentor develops a learning agreement that encompasses specific activities and expectations. Students are engaged in reflective activities that include journals, micro-reflections, formal presentations, and a comprehensive portfolio.""Leadership principles and strategies to influence and motivate team members to achieve personal, professional, and entrepreneurial goals in production agriculture, agricultural education, and agricultural organizations.""Development of written, oral, visual and electronic communications relevant to agriculture and life sciences. Students develop skills and perspectives consistent ethical and democratic principles applicable to agriculture, natural resource, and life science issues. Provide explanations of scientific and technical concepts to rural, industry, and urban audiences. Field trips.""Introduction to SMAW (Arc), GMAW (Mig), GTAW (Tig), Oxy-Fuel welding, Oxy-Fuel cutting, and Plasma cutting theories and applications. Emphasis will be on theoretical foundation of welding, safety, welding skill development, and management of equipment, and materials. Introduction to small engines and applications. Emphasis will be on theory of operating systems, maintenance, troubleshooting, failure analysis, and safety."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Responsibilities of an agricultural education teacher, curriculum development, experiential learning opportunities including FFA and SAE, and assessment and maintenance of program quality.""Topics include: principles of teaching and learning, individualized and group methods, application of learning, instructional management, special populations, and evaluation.""A supervised two to twelve week learning experience in an approved learning setting with application to educational, agricultural, communications and/or environmental practices and principles.""Basic concepts in planning, conducting, and evaluating educational programs in non-formal settings. Includes programming for youth and adults in Extension, agricultural industry, and related agencies."A forty hour field-based experience in an approved secondary agricultural education program. Concurrent enrollment in 417 is required.Supervised teaching in public schools."Participation in the management and operation of a diversified Iowa farm. The class is responsible for the plans, records, and decisions for buying and selling the farm's livestock, crops, and equipment. Special speakers on current topics. May be taken for credit 3 times at different times of the year with permission of the instructor.""The legal framework impinging upon decision-making by firms, families, and individuals, real and personal property, contracts, secured transactions, negotiable instruments, debtor-creditor relations, bankruptcy, farm income tax organization of firms, intergenerational property transfers, trusts and farm estate planning, civil and criminal liabilities, environmental law, federal and state regulatory powers."Impact of agricultural and extension education processes on development and their role in the transfer of agricultural technology. Utilizing situational analysis techniques to analyze and solve problems in international agricultural education programs."Participation in the management and operation of fruit and vegetable enterprises for local markets.  The class is responsible for the plans, records, and decision for planting, operating, harvesting, and marketing fruit and vegetables.""Participation in the management and operation of fruit and vegetable enterprises for local markets. Principles and practices of researching and developing a commercial business plan that will meet industry standards and that will be linked to the operations and production associated with the HORT 465 class.  Laboratory work includes development of a horticulture enterprise business plan, high tunnel site preparation and planting, development of summer crop portocols, seedling production for the summer crop (if applicable) and land preparation and planting of a portion of the summer crop.""Participation in the management and operation of fruit and vegetable enterprises for local markets. Principles and practices of harvesting and marketing high tunnel crops and the planting and growing of a variety of summer vegetables in the field.  Laboratory work includes all operation and production aspects involved with the day-to-day running of a horticultural enterprise.  The class will be responsible for crop selection and crop protocols for the fall high tunnel crop and seedling production for this crop (if applicable).  Additionally, the class will be responsible for all crop maintenance decisions and record keeping during the season.""Participation in the management and operation of fruit and vegetable enterprises for local markets. Principles and practices of researching and developing a commercial horticulture enterprise market plan that could be used by a startup business and that will be linked directly to the operations and production associated with the HORT 465 class.  Laboratory work includes completing the summer crop harvest, development of a horticulture marketing plan, high tunnel site preparation and planting, development of spring high tunnel crop protocols and all crop maintenance decisions and the record keeping for the fall high tunnel crop."Specialized training in communication and agricultural marketing knowledge and skills in preparation for intercollegiate competition.   Maximum of 6 credits can be applied toward graduation."Methods and management techniques in agricultural mechanics laboratories. Emphasis will be on safety, mechanical skills development and management of students, facilities, equipment, and materials."Limited enrollment. Extended field trips to study agriculture and education related topics. Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Trip expenses paid by students.Limited enrollment. Extended field trips to study agriculture and education related topics. Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Trip expenses paid by students.Limited enrollment. Extended field trips to study agriculture and education related topics. Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Trip expenses paid by students.Research experience in agricultural education and studies with application to selected problems."Responsibilities of an agricultural education teacher, curriculum development, experiential learning opportunities including FFA and SAE, and assessment and maintenance of program quality.""Topics include: principles of teaching and learning, individualized and group methods, application of learning, instructional management, special populations, and evaluation."Determining your research focus; developing research problems and objectives; reviewing the literature and establishing a theoretical framework; establishing procedures for data collection and analysis; ethical issues."The identification and use of key planning, delivery and evaluation of presentations using audience engagement techniques focused on research-based principles and field-based practices of professional presenters in agriculture and the life sciences.""Concepts and practices in planning, preparing, and presenting materials used in professional meetings and scientific papers by agriculturalists with special emphasis on computerized delivery methods."Theory and practice of adult education.  Teaching and learning in formal and non-formal instructional programs for adult learners."Theories and practice of program planning for nonformal education.  Addresses use of program logic modeling and considers critical theories of planning to address power and interests in program development, needs assessment, and evaluation.""Introduction to a variety of theoretical perspectives of learning and how they may be used within the context of agricultural education.  Emphasis will be on the major domains of learning, developmental considerations, basic assumptions, concepts, and principles of various learning theories; understanding how each theoretical perspective may be used in both formal and non-formal educational settings.""Philosophical premises, ethical principles, historical development, contextual applications, and knowledge bases for agricultural education."Impact of agricultural and extension education processes on development and their role in the transfer of agricultural technology. Utilizing situational analysis techniques to analyze and solve problems in international agricultural education programs.For nonthesis masters degree programs.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Analysis of the roles and activities of professionals in agricultural education. Supervised professional field-based experience in public and private settings.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Principles and best practices for leading, administering, supervising, and managing agricultural education programs.  Analyzing selected case studies that apply theory to practice in agricultural situations."A participatory experience in activities or completion of a course that enhances the development of leadership and group-dynamic skills. See adviser for departmental requirements."Orientation to college life, the profession of agronomy, and the agronomy curriculum.""A foundation course in agronomy applying crop, soil, and environmental sciences in understanding agricultural systems in the world.  Includes introductory concepts of plant, soil, tillage, pest, environmental, and sustainable aspects of crop production. Off-campus version offered through internet by interactive computer courseware.""Overview of soil, water, plants, and animals as renewable natural resources in an ecosystem context. History and organization of resource management. Concepts of integrated resource management.""Introduction to physical, chemical, and biological properties of soils, their formation, classification, and distribution. Use of soil survey and computer databank information in balancing agronomic, economic, and environmental concerns in soil management.   Credit for only one of Agron 154, 155, or 156 may be applied toward graduation.""Physical, chemical and biological properties of natural and manufactured soils. Use of soil information when producing plants on natural and manufactured soils.   Credit for only one of Agron 154, 155, or 156 may be applied toward graduation.""Study of the occurrence, history, development, and management of world water resources.  Basic hydrologic principles including climate, surface water, groundwater, and water quality.  Historical and current perspectives on water policy, use, and the role of water in society and the environment.""Understanding climate and its effects in global distribution of food and water resources. The nature of climate and its variability in space and time. Use of satellites and related technology to monitor crop production, water availability and climate. Influence of climate and climate change on drought, famine and other disruptions of essential resources. For students majoring in Agronomy.""Basic structure and function of plants, origin and classification, growth and development. Fundamentals of photosynthesis, plant water use, plant nutrition and genetics that regulate plant growth, development and responses to the environment. For students majoring in Agronomy.""Introduction to physical, chemical, and biological properties of soils; soil formation, classification and global distribution; soil health, soils and humanity and sustainable land Management. For students majoring in Agronomy."Problem solving in crop production and soil management. Integration and application of concepts introduced in AGRON 181 and 182. For students majoring in Agronomy."Basic concepts in weather and climate, including atmospheric measurements, radiation, stability, precipitation, winds, fronts, forecasting, and severe weather. Applied topics include global warming, ozone depletion, world climates and weather safety.""Career planning, rÌÄå©sumÌÄå© and cover letter preparation, and interviewing techniques. Career orientation through invited speakers.""Production and management practices for corn, soybean, small grain, and forage crops common to Midwestern U.S. agriculture. Emphasis on growth and development, plant characteristics, management practices, crop use, quality, and problem-solving.""Problem solving in crop production. Integration and application of concepts introduced in AGRON 212. Agronomic field skills such as crop and pest identification, integrated management strategies, staging crop growth, agricultural math and site specific management related to crop production will be emphasized.""Identification of important weeds of agricultural, horticultural and native ecosystems.  Principles of plant taxonomy and classification.  Field trips.""Structure, function, and transformations of organic compounds significant in plant and soil environments.""Role of soils in environmental quality and natural resources management. Emphasis on soil erosion and conservation, water quality, and environmental planning. Saturday field trip.""Core background and specialty topics in agricultural, and horticultural pesticide applicator certification. Students can select certification categories and have the opportunity to obtain pesticide applicator certification at the completion of the course. Commercial pesticide applicator certification is emphasized."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period.Professional work experience in agronomy. See adviser for departmental requirements.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."A supervised learning experience in a professional setting related to crop production, plant breeding, soil science or environmental science.""Basic principles concerning the growth, development, and production of crop communities in relation to their environment.""Biology and ecology of weeds. Interactions between weeds and crops. Principles and practices of integrated weed management systems. Herbicide mechanisms, classification, and fate in plants and soils.""Transmission genetics with an emphasis on applications in agriculture, the structure and expression of the gene, how genes behave in populations and how recombinant DNA technology can be used to improve agriculture.   Credit for graduation will not be allowed for more than one of the following: Gen 260, 313, 320 and Biol 313 and 313L.""Identification, agronomic and binomial classification of crops, weeds, and diseases. Analysis of crop seed samples for contaminants of weed and other crop seeds."Intensive training in preparation for intercollegiate competition in national crops contests."Production and management of forage crops; concepts applied to yield, quality, and stand persistence; systems of forage utilization including grazing, hay, and silage. Students enrolling for graduate credit will be expected to complete an additional class project.""Seed production, maturation, dormancy, vigor, deterioration, and related aspects of enhancement, conditioning, storage, and quality evaluation. Aspects of the seed industry and regulation of seed marketing.""Issues in the agricultural and food systems of the developed and developing world. Emphasis on economic, social, historical, ethical and environmental contexts. Causes and consequences of overnutrition/undernutrition, poverty, hunger and access/distribution. Explorations of current issues and ideas for the future. Team projects.""Issues in the agricultural and food systems of the developed and developing world. Emphasis on economic, social, historical, ethical and environmental contexts. Causes and consequences of overnutrition/undernutrition, poverty, hunger and access/distribution. Explorations of current issues and ideas for the future. Team projects.""Principles and practices of turfgrass propagation, establishment, and management. Specialized practices relative to professional lawn care, golf courses, athletic fields, highway roadsides, and seed and sod production. The biology and control of turfgrass pests."Those enrolled in the horticulture curriculum are required to take 351L in conjunction with 351 except by permission of the instructor."Effects of chemical, physical, and biological properties of soils on plant growth, with emphasis on nutritive elements, pH, organic matter maintenance, and rooting development."Laboratory exercises in soil testing that assess a soil's ability to support nutritive requirements for plant growth.Application of soil science to contemporary environmental problems; comparison of the impacts that different management strategies have on short- and long-term environmental quality and land development. Emphasis on participatory learning activities."Description and interpretation of soils in the field and laboratory, emphasizing hands-on experience. Evaluation of soil information for land use. Students may participate in intercollegiate judging contests.""How science works: Hypotheses, data integrity, classification, interpretations, ethics, and communications."Management strategies at the level of the farm field. Emphasis will be on participatory learning activities.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Effects of geomorphology, soils, and land use on transport of water and materials (nutrients, contaminates) in watersheds. Fieldwork will emphasize investigations of the Iowa Great Lakes watershed.""Recent changes in global biogeochemical cycles and climate; models of future changes in the climate system; impacts of global change on agriculture, water resources and human health; ethical issues of global environmental change.  Also offered online Alt. F, even-numbered years.""A description of the physical microenvironment in which organisms live. Emphasis on the movement of energy (heat and radiation) and mass (water and carbon) among organisms, the soil, and atmosphere.  Applications to humans, other animals, plants, and plant communities.""Distribution and causes of different climates around the world. Effects of climate and climate variations on human activities including society, economy and agriculture. Current issues such as climate change and international efforts to assess and mitigate the consequences of a changing climate.  Semester project and in-class presentation required.""Physical nature and practical consequences of mesoscale atmospheric phenomena. Mesoscale convective systems, fronts, terrain-forced circulations. Observation, analysis, and prediction of mesoscale atmospheric structure.""Development of an appropriate content for professionalism. Topics include professional certification, ethics, and maintaining an active network of information sources and professional contacts in support of lifelong learning. Student interpretation, writings, presentations, and discussions.""Breeding methods used in the genetic improvement of self-pollinated, cross-pollinated and asexually reproducing agronomic and horticultural crops. Applications of biotechnology techniques in the development of improved cultivars.""Interdisciplinary study and analysis of agricultural systems, sustainable management, and impact on plants and animal biodiversity. International field experience in evaluating different agricultural systems and impact on biodiversity may be required. A program fee is charged to students for international study abroad."Agricultural science as a human activity; contemporary agricultural issues from agroecological perspective. Comparative analysis of intended and actual consequences of development of industrial agricultural practices.Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) with particular emphasis on geoscientific data. Uses ESRI's ArcGIS Desktop Software and extension modules. Emphasizes typical GIS operations and analyses in the geosciences to prepare students for advanced GIS courses."An introduction to the chemical properties of soils, chemical reactions and transformations in soils and surface waters, and their impact on the environment. Topics include solution chemistry in soils and surface waters, solid-phase composition of soils, reactions at the solid-solution interface, and applications to contemporary environmental issues.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use. Two weekend field trips.   Credit for one of AGRON 463 or AGRON 463I may be applied for graduation.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use.   Credit for only Agron 563 or 563I may be applied for graduation.""The physical soil system: the soil components and their physical interactions; transport processes involving water, air, and heat."Understanding of the historical origins and ecological theories underpinning the practices involved in organic agriculture. Interdisciplinary examination of crop and livestock production and socio-economic processes and policies in organic agriculture from researcher and producer perspectives."The living organisms in the soil and what they do. Emphasis on soil biota composition, the carbon cycle and bioremediation, soil-plant-microbial relationships, and environmental issues.""GIS course with focus on the spatial analysis and modeling of raster data and triangulated irregular network (TIN) data. Uses ArcGIS and various extensions, such as Spatial Analyst, 3D Analyst, and ArcScene. Includes practical exercises during lectures, lab exercises, homework assignments, and (for GEOL 588) a class project.""Selected studies in crops, soils, or agricultural meteorology according to the needs and interests of the student.""Selected studies in crops, soils, or agricultural meteorology according to the needs and interests of the student.""Selected studies in crops, soils, or agricultural meteorology according to the needs and interests of the student.""Selected studies in crops, soils, or agricultural meteorology according to the needs and interests of the student.""Selected studies in crops, soils, or agricultural meteorology according to the needs and interests of the student."A professional work experience and creative project for seed science secondary majors. The project requires the prior approval and participation of the employer and instructor. The student must submit a written report."Workshop experience in crops, soils, or agricultural meteorology.""Limited enrollment. Students enrolled in this course intend to register for AGRON 496 the following term. Topics will include the agricultural industries, climate, crops, culture, economics, geography, history, livestock, marketing, soils, and preparation for travel to locations to be visited.""Limited enrollment. Tour and study of production methods in major crop and livestock regions of the world. Influence of climate, economics, geography, soils, landscapes, markets, and other factors on crop and livestock production. Location and duration of tours will vary. Tour expenses paid by students. Check with department for current offerings.""Limited enrollment. Tour and study of production methods in major crop and livestock regions of the world. Influence of climate, economics, geography, soils, landscapes, markets, and other factors on crop and livestock production. Location and duration of tours will vary. Tour expenses paid by students. Check with department for current offerings.""Limited enrollment. Tour and study of production methods in major crop and livestock regions of the world. Influence of climate, economics, geography, soils, landscapes, markets, and other factors on crop and livestock production. Location and duration of tours will vary. Tour expenses paid by students. Check with department for current offerings.""A one-week intensive class, offered off-campus. Student will visit farms within the Midwest and analyze the sustainability of each farm."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."An introduction to Iowa and U.S. agriculture for international scholars in agronomic majors. Field trips when possible. Departmental role in the functioning of research, teaching, and extension in fulfilling the charge given the land-grant university.""Physiological processes in crop growth, development and yield: photosynthesis, respiration, water relations, mineral nutrition, assimilate partitioning, seedling vigor, light interception and canopy growth, root growth, reproduction and yield. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program.""Soil chemical, physical, and biological properties that control processes within the soil, their influence on plant/soil interactions, and soil classification. Basic concepts in soil science and their applications. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program."Applied concepts in climate and agricultural meteorology with emphasis on the climate-agriculture relationship and the microclimate-agriculture interaction. Basic meteorological principles are also presented to support these applied concepts. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program."Recent changes in global biogeochemical cycles and climate; models of future changes in the climate system; impacts of global change on agriculture, water resources and human health; ethical issues of global environmental change.  Also offered online Alt. F, even-numbered years.""A description of the physical microenvironment in which organisms live. Emphasis on the movement of energy (heat and radiation) and mass (water and carbon) among organisms, the soil, and atmosphere.  Applications to humans, other animals, plants, and plant communities.""Introduction to genetics of reproductive systems, recombination, segregation and linkage analysis, inbreeding, quantitative inheritance, fertility regulation, and polyploidy to prepare students for subsequent courses in crop improvement. Enrollment is restricted to off-campus MS in Plant Breeding students.""Gallus. The physical nature and practical consequences of mesoscale atmospheric phenomena. Mesoscale convective systems, fronts, terrain-forced circulations. Observation, analysis, and prediction of mesoscale atmospheric structure. Semester project and in-class presentation required.""Physical modeling of bio-response and crop adaptation to climate. Principles of resource capture (light and water) applied to growth and development. Ecological implications of radiation, temperature, moisture, and the biological properties of size, shape, resistance to water vapor loss, and absorptivity to solar and thermal radiation. Physiological stress in the soil, plant, atmosphere continuum.""Experiential, interdisciplinary examination of Midwestern agricultural and food systems, emphasizing field visits, with some classroom activities. Focus on understanding multiple elements, perspectives (agronomic, economic, ecological, social, etc), and scales of operation."A study of the basic principles and methods in the genetic improvement of crop plants. Methods used in manipulating genomes through the use of biotechnology. Methods of cultivar development.  Quantitative procedures for describing response to selection. Analysis of the relationship of reproductive characters and growth characteristics to response to selection.Basic principles in the genetic improvement of crop plants. Methods of cultivar development in self-pollinated and cross-pollinated crop species. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program."Soil properties and their impact on soil/plant relationships. Soil structure, aeration, moisture, and nutrients will be discussed in the context of soil fertility and environmental quality management. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program.""Quantitative methods for analyzing and interpreting agronomic information. Principles of experimental design, hypothesis testing, analysis of variance, regression, correlation, and graphical representation of data. Use of SAS and Excel for organization, analyzing, and presenting data. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program.""Principles and practices of weed science, entomology, and plant pathology applied to crop production systems. Biology, ecology and principles of integrated crop pest management. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program.""Methods to maintain productivity and minimize the negative ecological effects of agricultural systems by understanding nutrient cycles, managing manure and crop residue, and utilizing multispecies interactions. Crop and livestock production within landscapes and watersheds is also considered. Course includes a significant field component, with student teams analyzing Iowa farms.""Investigation of Molecular, whole plant, and plant community processes essential to biomass production and seed formation, and analysis of molecular approaches to overcome the limitations imposed on these processes by the environment.""Microwave remote sensing of Earth's surface and atmosphere using satellite-based or ground-based instruments. Specific examples include remote sensing of atmospheric temperature and water vapor, precipitation, ocean salinity, and soil moisture.""Herbicide mechanisms of action, selectivity, uptake, and translocation. Specific sites of herbicide action as they affect plant physiology. Herbicide resistance in weeds and crops. Implications of herbicides on weed management.""Breeding methods used in the genetic improvement of self-pollinated, cross-pollinated and asexually reproducing agronomic and horticultural crops. Application of biotechnology techniques in the development of improved cultivars.""Theoretical and practical analysis of alternative breeding methods to improve crop plants. Strategies to incorporate germplasm resources, develop populations, maximize genetic gain, and use marker-assisted selection. Relationship of breeding methods to commercial seed production."Field experience in planning and conducting plant breeding research for germplasm and cultivar development.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Plant breeding in the era of sequenced genomes and transformation. High throughout genomic technologies will be presented in relation to various applications in plant breeding."Basic principles and applied techniques used in the genetic improvement of crop plants. Discussion of structure and function of genes that control traits of value. Types of molecular markers, analysis of quantitatively inherited traits, genome mapping, analyses of databases.""Understanding basic crop physiology and soil processes through the use of mathematical and statistical approaches. Structure of crop models, dynamics and relationship among components such as leaf-level photosynthesis, canopy architecture, root dynamics and soil carbon and nitrogen pools.""Planning experiments for agricultural research, analysis of data, and concepts in data interpretation."An introduction to the application of quantitative genetics to plant breeding programs."Durable, least-toxic strategies for managing weeds, pathogens, and insect pests, with emphasis on underlying ecological processes.""Ecological principles underlying crop production systems. Crop production in the context of management approaches, system resources and constraints, and interactions. Emphasis on the ecology of row and forage crops common to the Midwest. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program.""Evaluates the impact of various soil management practices on soil and water resources. Combines and applies basic information gained in AGRON 502 and AGRON 512. Emphasizes the agronomic, economic, and environmental effects of soil management strategies. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program.""Integrated management systems for important crop pests. Cultural, biological and chemical management strategies applicable to major crops grown in the Midwest. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program.""The components of seed quality and how they are assessed in the laboratory, including traits derived from modern biotechnology. The impact of new technologies on seed quality testing. Variety maintenance procedures and breeder seed. Variety identification: phenotype and grow-out trials, isozyme testing, and DNA marker testing. Procedures for evaluating varieties. The variance tests appropriate for fixed effects analysis of variance. Statistical inference and stratification for yield trials. Use of strip plot testing.""An analysis of the defining characteristics of the seed industry and introduction to the Master in Seed Technology and Business curriculum. The tasks of crop improvement and seed production will be analytically related to basic management functions and classifications of management activities that are used in the study of business administration. Management tasks and roles will be analyzed in related to the public policy issues that shape the seed industry, including ethical and economical approaches to biotechnology, intellectual property, and corporate responsibility.""Quantitative Methods for analyzing and interpreting agronomic and business information for the seed industry. Principles of experimental design and hypothesis testing, regression, correlation and graphical representation of data. Use of spreadsheets for manipulating, analyzing and presenting data.""Physiological aspects of seed development, maturation, longevity, dormancy, and germination. Emphasis on current literature and advanced methodology."The technical operations which may be carried out on a seed lot from harvest until it is ready for marketing and use. The opportunities for quality improvement and the risks of deterioration which are present during that time. Analysis of the costs of and benefits of operations. Evaluation of equipment based on benefits to the customer and producer. Interpretation of the role of the conditioning plant and store as a focal points within the overall operations of a seed company."Applied concepts in agricultural meteorology. Basic concepts of weather and of crop/climate relationships influencing production, protection, yield and associated production risk factors. Self study sections are available to resident and to distant education students all semesters.   Credit for only one of Agron 503 or 541 may be applied toward graduation.""Incorporation of the principles of integrated pest management and crop protection. Management systems (biological, cultural, chemical) and strategies which practice principles of weed science, plant pathology, and entomology. Enrollment is restricted to off-campus students in Agronomy MS in Plant Breeding."Project-focused engagement in food and farming systems using tools and perspectives drawn from multiple disciplines. Includes a field component."Survey of crop production; including management of soil fertility, planting dates, populations, weed control, and insect control. Analysis of the principles of seed multiplication and the key practices which are used to ensure high quality in the products. Field inspection procedures and production aspects that differ from other crop production. Foundation seed production. Analysis of the typical organization of field production tasks. Resources and capabilities required. Survey of differences in seed production strategies  between crops and impact of  differences on management of seed production.""Selected topics on anatomy, morphology, and physiology relative to growth and development of perennial grasses. Emphasis on growth and development characteristics peculiar to grasses and variations of such characteristics under natural and managed conditions."Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) with particular emphasis on geoscientific data. Uses ESRI's ArcGIS Desktop Software and extension modules. Emphasizes typical GIS operations and analyses in the geosciences to prepare students for advanced GIS courses.Composition and properties of soils in relation to the nutrition and growth of plants.Implications of soil management on the soil environment and root activity. Effect of soil physical properties on soil erosion."Structure and behavior of clay minerals, humic substances and biochar in soil environments, with emphasis on reactions and environmental implications.""Major, biologically important agroecosystem nutrient cycles as linked to energy (carbon) and water. Effects of agricultural production and management on cycling within systems and transfer among system at local, regional and global scales will be emphasized.""Experimental and descriptive inorganic and organic analyses. Operational theory and principles of applicable instruments, including spectrophotometry, atomic and molecular absorption and emission spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, X-ray diffraction and fluorescence, gas and ion chromatography, and ion-selective electrodes.""An introduction to the chemical properties of soils, chemical reactions and transformations in soils and surface waters, and their impact on the environment. Topics include solution chemistry in soils and surface waters, solid-phase composition of soils, reactions at the solid-solution interface, and applications to contemporary environmental issues.""Population and quantitative genetics for plant and animal genetics. Study of the genetic basis and analysis of variation in quantitative traits in domestic or experimental populations using phenotypic and molecular marker data, including estimation of heritability and other genetic parameters, linkage analysis and mapping of quantitative trait loci, and the impact of inbreeding, heterosis, and genotype-by-environment interaction.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use. Two weekend field trips.   Credit for one of AGRON 463 or AGRON 463I may be applied for graduation.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use.   Credit for only Agron 563 or 563I may be applied for graduation."Risk assessment principles as applied to biological systems. Exposure and effects characterization in human and animal health and ecological risk assessment.  Risk analysis frameworks and regulatory decision-making.  Introduction to quantitative methods for risk assessment using epidemiological and distributional analysis.  Uncertainty analysis.  This course is available only by distance."Advanced study of soil formation, emphasizing relationships among soils, landscapes, environment, humans, and land use.""The physical soil system: the soil components and their physical interactions; transport processes involving water, air, and heat.""Methods of measuring soil physical properties such as texture, density, and water content, and transport of heat, water, and gases."Understanding of the historical origins and ecological theories underpinning the practices involved in organic agriculture. Interdisciplinary examination of crop and livestock production and socio-economic processes and policies in organic agriculture from researcher and producer perspectives."The living organisms in the soil and what they do. Emphasis on soil biota composition, the carbon cycle and bioremediation, soil-plant-microbial relationships, and environmental issues.""GIS course with focus on the spatial analysis and modeling of raster data and triangulated irregular network (TIN) data. Uses ArcGIS and various extensions, such as Spatial Analyst, 3D Analyst, and ArcScene. Includes practical exercises during lectures, lab exercises, homework assignments, and (for GEOL 588) a class project.""Literature reviews and conferences on selected topics in crops, soils, or agricultural meteorology according to needs and interest of student."Analysis of cropping systems from a problem-solving perspective. Case studies will be used to develop the students' ability to solve agronomic problems. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program."Study and discussion of topics of current interest to the field of agronomy. While AGRON 591 deals with agronomics at the farm and landscape level, AGRON 592 seeks to address issues on a broader scale including off-farm agricultural impacts. Required course for the Master of Science in Agronomy degree program.""Practical field and laboratory experiences integrating coursework in climatology, crops, and soils. Includes lectures, labs and local agri-business tours.""Advanced survey of the organization, staff capabilities and management characteristics typical in seed production and crop improvement in seed enterprises. Analysis of the use of quality information in the management of seed operations and sales. Process management applications for seed.  Production planning for existing capacity.  Analysis of the manager's tasks in the annual cycle and how the tasks of these managers relate to the general categories of business management roles. Difference in management strategies used with different situations and groups of employees.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee."Reports and discussion of recent literature and research."Instruction and practice in giving scientific presentations related to the fields of plant breeding, genetics, or genomics, with an emphasis on effective communication and presentation techniques. An oral seminar and a poster presentation are required, along with analyses of other seminars, and participation in planning and hosting invited speakers."Reports and discussion of recent literature and research.Reports and discussion of recent literature and research.Experience in critical communications in exchange of ideas through oral and poster presentations and scientific questioning/evaluation."Atmospheric boundary-layer structure and dynamics. Diurnal and seasonal variations, turbulent fluxes and turbulence kinetic energy. Measurements and empirical relations for wind and temperature near the ground. Numerical simulation and applications to wind energy.""Historical, biophysical, socioeconomic, and ethical dimensions of agricultural sustainability. Strategies for evaluating existing and emerging agricultural systems in terms of the core concepts of sustainability and their theoretical contexts.""Estimation and interpretation of genetic effects and variances of plant breeding populations, analysis of mating designs, estimation of combining ability and heritability, best linear unbiased prediction, selection indices with and without molecular information, inbreeding and heterosis.""Evaluation of genetic, molecular, and cellular approaches to crop improvement; gene transfer methods. Application and role of basic plant biology in breeding programs and processes; genome structure and function, gene isolation, expression, regulation, and modification. Integration of molecular and cellular methods in breeding strategies; analysis of alternative breeding methods, regulatory and ethical issues."Evaluation of soil fertility and fertilizers; theory and applications."The flow and distribution of water, chemicals, and heat in soils. Physical principles and applications."Chemistry of soil organic matter and biochemical transformations brought about by microorganisms and enzymes in soils.Research seminars by faculty and graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Graduate student experience in the agronomy teaching program.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Instruction on Air Force customs and courtesies; drill and ceremonies, issuing military commands, physical training, studying the environment of an Air Force officer and learning about areas of opportunity available to commissioned officers.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""A continuation of AFAS 101. Air Force customs and courtesies; drill and ceremonies, issuing military commands, physical training, studying the environment of an Air Force officer and learning about areas of opportunity available to commissioned officers.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Basic introduction to the United States Air Force and Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps. Mission and organization of the Air Force, officership and professionalism, military customs and courtesies, Air Force officer opportunities, and communication skills.""A continuation of 141. Topics include Air Force installations, Air Force core values, leadership and team building, further study of interpersonal communication, the Oath of Office and Commissioning.""Use of basic military training skills and instruction to develop confidence, leadership, communication skills and physical fitness. The team approach is utilized in the instruction and application of Air Force physical fitness requirements. Students will learn various Air Force physical fitness techniques as well as how to conduct physical fitness sessions. Full participation in all events will be determined based on student's physical and medical eligibility.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Instructs and critiques freshmen cadets on Air Force customs and courtesies, drill and ceremonies, issuing military commands and physical training.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""A continuation of AFAS 201, instructing and critiquing freshmen cadets on Air Force customs and courtesies, drill and ceremonies, issuing military commands and physical training.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Examines the general aspects of air and space power through a historical perspective.  Utilizing this perspective, the course covers a time period from the first balloons and dirigibles to the Korean War.  Historical examples are provided to illustrate the development of airpower capabilities and missions to demonstrate the evolution of what has become today's USAF air and space power.""A continuation of AFAS 241 that examines the general aspects of air and space power through a historical perspective.  Utilizing this perspective, the course covers a time period from the Korean War to the space-age global positioning systems of the Persian Gulf War.  Historical examples are provided to illustrate the development of airpower capabilities and missions to demonstrate the evolution of what has become today's USAF air and space power.""Mid-level management of leadership experiences involving the planning and controlling of the military activities of the AFROTC cadet corps, physical training, the preparation and presentation of briefings and other oral and written communications, and the providing of interviews, guidance, and information that will increase the understanding, motivation, and performance of other cadets.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""A continuation of AFAS 301, mid-level management of leadership experiences involving the planning and controlling of the military activities of the AFROTC cadet corps, physical training, the preparation and presentation of briefings and other oral and written communications, and the providing of interviews, guidance, and information that will increase the understanding, motivation, and performance of other cadets.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""A look at the fundamental issues of leadership and management in the U.S Air Force; a large and diverse organization. It examines the theoretical aspects of leadership, management, communications, motivation and problem-solving while studying them against the backdrop of the U.S. Air Force. The course also conducts hands-on exercises to apply principles learned. While the curriculum is focused on the Air Force as an organization, the principles studied are applicable to most organizations.""A continuation of AFAS 341, that looks at the advanced issues of leadership and management in the U.S. Air Force; a large and diverse organization.  It examines the theoretical aspects of leadership, managment, communications, motivation and problem-solving while studying them against the backdrop of the U.S. Air Force.  The course also conducts hands-on exercises to apply principles learned.  While the curriculum is focused on the Air Force as an organization, the principles studied are applicable to most oranizations.""Advanced leadership experiences involving the planning and controlling of the upper level management of military activities of the AFROTC cadet corps, physical training, the preparation and presentation of briefings and other oral and written communications, and the providing of interviews, guidance, and information that will increase the understanding, motivation, and performance of other cadets.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""A continuation of AFAS 401, advanced leadership experiences involving the planning and controlling of the military activities of the AFROTC cadet corps, physical training, the preparation and presentation of briefings and other oral and written communications, and the providing of interviews, guidance, and information that will increase the understanding, motivation, and performance of other cadets.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Traces the source of military authority and responsibilities from the U.S. Constitution through the DoD to an Air Force officer.  Examines the structure and capabilities of the other services and joint structures.  Addresses the supervisory duties of an Air Force officer associated with administrative actions and military law as force management tools.  Builds upon leadership and management skill learned in AFAS 341/342 and includes demonstrations of written and verbal communications processes."Examines the national security process through review of the Department of Defense's statutory administrative and operational relationships as context for this course's regional studies component. Reviews functions of air and space power as outlined in Air Force doctrine and introduces the concept of joint operations. Integrates these concepts with regional studies to survey issues of interest to professional military officers and governmental leaders. Selectively reviews and discusses Africa, Latin America, South Asia, East Asia, Europe, Russia and the Middle East.""Introduction to the multidisciplinary aspects of American Indian studies. Topics include literature, the arts, history, anthropology, sociology, education, and contemporary Indian politics. Guest lectures, media presentations, and discussion of assigned readings.""Appreciation of oral and written forms of American Indian literatures. Tropes and techniques in oral, visual and written texts. Focus on the role of American Indians in interdisciplinary approaches to modern social and environmental issues as expressed in literary works.""Study of specific topics in American Indian society and culture from an interdisciplinary perspective. Topics vary by section.   Only 9 credits of AM IN 310A, 310B, 310C, 310D, 310E, 310F, 310G may count toward graduation.""Study of specific topics in American Indian society and culture from an interdisciplinary perspective. This section examines the concept of American Indian sovereignty as it relates to policy and law.   Only 9 credits of AM IN 310A, 310B, 310C, 310D, 310E, 310F, 310G may count toward graduation.""Study of specific topics in American Indian society and culture from an interdisciplinary perspective. This section examines oral traditions and performance.   Only 9 credits of AM IN 310A, 310B, 310C, 310D, 310E, 310F, 310G may count toward graduation.""Study of specific topics in American Indian society and culture from an interdisciplinary perspective. This section examines American Indians in film.   Only 9 credits of AM IN 310A, 310B, 310C, 310D, 310E, 310F, 310G may count toward graduation.""Study of specific topics in American Indian society and culture from an interdisciplinary perspective. This section looks at spiritual traditions in American Indian culture.   Only 9 credits of AM IN 310A, 310B, 310C, 310D, 310E, 310F, 310G may count toward graduation.""Study of specific topics in American Indian society and culture from an interdisciplinary perspective. This section examines current issues in American Indian scholarship and education.   Only 9 credits of AM IN 310A, 310B, 310C, 310D, 310E, 310F, 310G may count toward graduation.""Study of specific topics in American Indian society and culture from an interdisciplinary perspective. This section looks at current issues of resources and the environment on native lands.   Only 9 credits of AM IN 310A, 310B, 310C, 310D, 310E, 310F, 310G may count toward graduation.""Study of specific topics in American Indian society and culture from an interdisciplinary perspective. This section looks at current cultural representations of identity.   Only 9 credits of AM IN 310A, 310B, 310C, 310D, 310E, 310F, 310G may count toward graduation."Prehistory and early history of North America as reconstructed from archaeological evidence; peopling of the New World; culture-  historical sequences of major culture areas; linkages of archaeological traditions with selected ethnohistorically known Native   American groups."Prehistoric societies of the Great Plains region of North America, from initial occupation to European contact; emphasis on   sociocultural changes, continuities, and adaptations to changing environments using archaeological, ecological, ethnographic   information.""Origin, distribution, and pre-contact life of the indigenous peoples of North America. Survey of culture areas; language families,   social and political systems, ecological and economic adaptations, religion and spirituality; impact of European contact;  cultural   resilience and revitalization in contemporary American Indian life."Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered."Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Literature of American Indian women writers which examines their social, political, and cultural roles in the United States. Exploration of American Indian women's literary, philosophical, and artistic works aimed at recovering elements of identity, redescribing stereotypes, resisting colonization, and constructing femininity."Survey of literature by Native Americans from pre-Columbian tales and songs to contemporary novels and poetry."History, theory, and principles of Native American/American Indian architecture, landscape architecture and planning considering relationships to the culture, visual arts, site, and surroundings. Credit counts toward fulfillment History, Theory, Culture.   A maximum of 6 credits of ARCH 426 may be applied to degree program."Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits in Am In 490 may be counted toward graduation."Introduction to American Sign Language (ASL). Development of expressive and receptive skills including vocabulary, grammar, usage, and cultural information. Note: Distinct from Ì¢‰âÂÅÒSigned EnglishÌ¢‰âÂåù. ASL is a natural language with its own rules of grammar and usage.""Introduction to American Sign Language (ASL) II continues development of expressive and receptive skills introduced in American Sign Language I, including vocabulary, grammar, usage, and cultural information. Distinct from Ì¢‰âÂÅÒSigned EnglishÌ¢‰âÂåù. ASL is a natural language with its own rules of grammar and usage.""Development of fluency for intermediate conversational skills. Review of grammar and varying grammatical forms for both structured and unstructured social situations such as sharing opinions, discussing weekend activities, and exchanging views on current topics.""A continuation and further application of language principles learned in ASL 201, to deepen ability to actively engage in dialogue both in structured and unstructured social situations. Further fluency in intermediate conversational skills will be developed, particularly in the areas of sematic equivalence and dialogic/monologic register.""Focus on contemporary topics in Deaf Culture, Communities, and History. Readings and discussion from a wide range of sources. Topics vary according to faculty interest.""Designed to meet the needs of students in areas other than those in which courses are offered, or who desire to integrate a study of literature or language with special problems in major fields.   No more than 6 credits of ASL 490 may be counted towards graduation.""Fundamental concepts and principles of ecology dealing with organisms, populations, communities and ecosystems. Laboratory and field exercises examine ecological principles and methods as well as illustrate habitats.""An introduction to the principles of ecology at the population, community and ecosystem level. Field studies of local lakes, wetlands and prairies are used to examine factors controlling distributions, interactions, and roles of plants and animals in native ecosystems.""Biology, ecology, and evolution of fishes.  Emphasis on structure, physiology, and behavior, including a focus on the conservation and management of fishes and their habitats.  Laboratory focus on fish morphology, survey methods, identification, distribution, habits, and habitats of fishes.""The biology, ecology, and behavior of birds with emphasis on field studies of local avifauna. Group projects stress techniques of population analysis and methodology for population studies."Introduction to techniques used in the collection and interpretation of fish population data in the field and in the lab.  Course objectives include an understanding of population survey methodology and improving student critical thinking and teamwork skills. Laboratory focuses on field trips and hands-on sampling experience."Evolution, biology, and classification of fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Emphasis on a comparative analysis of the structure and function of organ systems. Laboratory exercises concentrate on morphology and identification of orders of vertebrates.""Vertebrate fauna of Iowa, including fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Species identification, habitat requirements, community structure and assessment, conservation issues that include historical population changes and value of wild animals to the region's ecological and economic health."Quantitative techniques used in management of natural resources with emphasis on inventory and manipulation of habitat and animal populations."8 week course. Introductory course with focus on fin fish production, health and medicine. Course content will help define future roles for veterinarians, producers, and service providers.  Emphasis will be placed on anatomy, pathology, infectious diseases, nutrition, regulatory constraints in production, food safety, and current research. Field trip to aquaculture facility.""Animal coloniality, courtship, territoriality, predator defense, habitat selection, foraging, mating systems, and parental care will be examined in the field in order to evaluate various ecological and evolutionary theories of animal behavior.""Identification, biology, and ecological requirements of freshwater invertebrates, plants and algae. Additional emphases on community sampling methods and analysis, and use of organisms as tools for aquatic ecosystem health assessment.""Biological, chemical, physical, and geological processes that determine the structure and function of flowing water ecosystems. Current ecological theories as well as applications to stream management for water quality and fisheries.""Field and laboratory study of representative vertebrates of northwestern Iowa. Observations and experimentation emphasize ecological histories by integrating concepts of functional morphology, behavioral ecology, and evolutionary biology.""Ecology, behavior, and conservation biology of amphibians and reptiles with emphasis on their anatomy and morphology; temperature and water regulation; locomotion; life history; reproduction; population and community ecology; and conservation.""Morphology, ecology, diversity, and significance of aquatic insects, with emphasis on the collection, curation and identification of taxa in local streams and lakes.""Biological basis of fishery management, fishery problems, and management practices for freshwater, anadromous, and marine fisheries.""Concepts related to the culture of aquatic organisms including culture systems, water quality, nutrition, genetics, diseases, and marketing.""Ecological theory and practice of wildlife management, including, population ecology, habitat management, and current issues in the field. Course involves a series of case studies addressing actual wildlife issues using field and quantitative methods.""Ecological and epidemiological aspects of diseases as they relate to wildlife populations. Topics to be covered include: major classes of disease; detection, description, monitoring, and management of disease; characteristics and interactions between disease agents and wildlife hosts; relationships among wildlife, domestic animal, and human health.""Biological, political, social, and economic factors affecting the management of international wildlife resources.""Biology, ecology, and evolution of amphibians (salamanders, frogs, caecilians) and reptiles (lizards, snakes, tuatara, turtles, crocodilians).  Emphasis on structure, physiological adaptation to different environments, behavior, reproduction, roles of amphibians and reptiles in ecosystems, and conservation.  Laboratory focus on survey methods, identification, relationships, distribution, habits, and habitats of amphibians and reptiles.""Laboratory to accompany Biology/Animal Ecology 457. Focus on survey methods, identification, relationships, distribution, habits, and habitats of amphibians and reptiles.""Biology, evolution, ecology and taxonomy of birds.  Emphasis on structure, physiology, behavior, communication, navigation, reproduction, and conservation.""Laboratory complements lecture topics with emphasis on external anatomy, identification and distribution of Midwest birds, and field trips.""Biology, ecology, and evolution of mammals.  Emphasis on structure, physiological adaptation to different environments, behavior, reproduction, roles of mammals in ecosystems, and conservation.""Laboratory focus on identification, survey methods, distribution, habits, and habitats of mammals. Several field trips."Courses taken at Gulf Coast Research Laboratory and other marine biological stations are transferred to Iowa State University under this number."Structure and function of aquatic ecosystems with application to fishery and pollution problems. Emphasis on lacustrine, riverine, and wetland ecology."Field trips and laboratory exercises to accompany 486. Hands-on experience with aquatic research and monitoring techniques and concepts."Identification, biology, and ecological requirements of freshwater invertebrates, plants and algae. Additional emphases on community sampling methods and analysis, and use of organisms as tools for aquatic ecosystem health assessment.""Current topics and theories including avian breeding and foraging ecology, population biology, community structure, habitat selection, field methodologies, and data interpretation.""Biological, chemical, physical, and geological processes that determine the structure and function of flowing water ecosystems. Current ecological theories as well as applications to stream management for water quality and fisheries.""Concepts, approaches, and techniques for assessment of recreational and commercial fisheries. Scope will range from individual fish to entire ecosystems, both freshwater and marine.""Basic principles of fish interaction with the biotic and abiotic environment. Field methods, taxonomy, and biology of fish with emphasis on the fish fauna of northwestern Iowa.""Morphology, ecology, diversity, and significance of aquatic insects, with emphasis on the collection, curation and identification of taxa in local streams and lakes."Field study of birds of the upper Midwest; extended field trip to Minnesota and Wisconsin; individual or group project."Examination of conservation issues from a population and a community perspective. Population-level analysis will focus on the role of genetics, demography, and environment in determining population viability. Community perspectives will focus on topics such as habitat fragmentation, reserve design, biodiversity assessment, and restoration ecology."Population-and community-level examination of factors influencing the viability of plant and animal populations from both demographic and genetic perspectives; assessment of biodiversity; design and management of preserves."Ecological principles for the restoration of native ecosystems; establishment (site preparation, selection of seed   mixes, planting techniques) and management (fire, mowing, weed control) of native vegetation; evaluation of restorations. Emphasis on the restoration of prairie and wetland vegetation.""Biological basis of fishery management, fishery problems, and management practices for freshwater, anadromous, and marine fisheries.""Concepts related to the culture of aquatic organisms including culture systems, water quality, nutrition, genetics, diseases, and marketing.""The study of how an animal's behavior affects its ability to survive and reproduce in its environment. Course topics, such as foraging behavior, sexual selection, parental care, etc., represent the interface of ecology, evolution, and behavior.""Ecological and epidemiological aspects of disease as they relate to wildlife populations. Topics to be covered include: major classes of disease; detection, description, monitoring, and management of disease; characteristics and interactions between disease agents and wildlife hosts; relationship among wildlife, domestic animal, and human health.""The study of ecological and evolutionary processes within a spatial context with emphasis on behavior, population, and community dynamics.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""Concepts and theories of population dynamics with emphasis on models of growth, predation, competition, and regulation."Graduate student experience in the animal ecology teaching program.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."A hands-on introductory course in skills for proper care and management of domestic animals. Husbandry skills including health observation, animal movement, identification, management procedures, and environmental assessment are covered.""Orientation to the university and Department of Animal Science. Challenges and opportunities available to the professional animal agriculturalist. Professional goal setting, portfolio development, and development of interpersonal skills in the context of pursuing a career in animal science.""Ways domestic animals serve the basic needs of humans for food, shelter, protection, fuel, and emotional well-being. Terminology, basic structures of the industries surrounding the production, care, and marketing of domestic animals in the U.S."Development of best practices for safe horse handling and practical equine health care tasks.  Course will focus on equine welfare and human safety as well as provide training in necessary every day skills needed to own a horse or to work at a horse farm.  Certificate of Safe Equine Handling and Welfare available upon course completion. Offered on satisfactory - fail grading basis only.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Understanding of animal perception to develop best care practices involved in handing of livestock species (beef, sheep, swine, dairy, equine, poultry). Intensive development of skills associated with handling and moving healthy and compromised livestock in respect to human and animal welfare. Integration of scientific and theoretical knowledge of biosecurity and animal-human interactions as it related to livestock handling and movement.""Management and coordination of livestock shows, sales and events, including program planning, staff and volunteer management, time management, publicity and promotion for fairs, shows, clinics, expos, and other events. For section E students are expected to take the fall and spring courses consecutively.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of two credits of AnS 199 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.""Management and coordination of livestock shows, sales and events, including program planning, staff and volunteer management, time management, publicity and promotion for fairs, shows, clinics, expos, and other events. For section E students are expected to take the fall and spring courses consecutively.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of two credits of AnS 199 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.""Management and coordination of livestock shows, sales and events, including program planning, staff and volunteer management, time management, publicity and promotion for fairs, shows, clinics, expos, and other events. For section E students are expected to take the fall and spring courses consecutively.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of two credits of AnS 199 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.""Using art as a venue to understand the legacy and heritage of livestock production and livestockÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s contribution to civilization and society; livestockÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s contributions to warfare, social class, industry, economies, etc.; history of the impact of livestock on painting, poetry, music, sculpture, advertising, pop culture, movies, religion and sports in society.""Life skill development emphasized in the context of career preparation. Assist students with career goal clarification, interview skills, resume and cover letter preparation. Internship development, job shadowing, and exploration of career option.""Overview of the factors that define contemporary ethical and scientifically based issues facing animal agriculture. Life skill development (including interactive skills, communication ability, organization, information gathering, and leadership skills) emphasized in the context of issues study.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to anatomy and physiology of the muscular, renal, skeletal, neural, mammary, cardiovascular, respiratory, immune, endocrine, reproductive, and digestive systems of domestic animals."Basic anatomy of domestic animals."Introduction to contemporary concepts, and basic practices and decisions necessary when managing horses through stages of their lives.""Intensified management of the equine farm. Provide students with experiential learning in all phases of horse production and management. Students assist with general farm management, preparing horses for sale, marketing techniques and web design.""Introduction to principles, practices and decisions necessary when raising poultry through their production cycle.""Introduction of students to contemporary concepts, and basic practices and decisions necessary when caring for the companion animal through stages of its life.""Introduction to principles, practices and decisions necessary when raising swine through the vertically integrated production cycle.   Only AN S 280 and AN S 280L or AN S 225 may count toward graduation.""Introduction to principles, practices and decisions necessary when raising beef cattle through the vertically integrated production cycle.""Introduction to principles, practices and decisions necessary when raising sheep through their production cycle.""Introduction to principles, practices and decisions necessary when raising dairy cattle through the vertically integrated production cycle.""Principles, practices and issues impacting the production, processing and preservation of safe, wholesome, nutritious, and palatable meat, dairy, and egg products. Product evaluation, classification, value, and utilization.""Determination of composition and quality of meat, eggs and milk based on industry and USDA standards. Fundamentals of processing foods of animal orgin to add value, maintain quality and ensure safety.""Basic disciplines and concepts involved in swine production including; industry structure, trends and statistics; production phases and buildings; genetic improvement; reproduction; nutrition; health and biosecurity; nutrient management; marketing and meat quality and career opportunities in the swine industry.   Only AN S 280 and AN S 280L or AN S 225 may count toward graduation.""Fall semester leads to 475A or D. Breeding animal and market animal evaluation of beef, swine and sheep using contemporary techniques and tools. Communication and decision-making skills are practiced in the context of making selection decisions."Detailed visual evaluation of conformation and performance of the equine athlete.  Decision-making skills are practiced in the context of making selection choices.  Development of written and oral communication skills as students defend their judgments.  Industry trends will be addressed."Physiological adaptations to athletic training in canine and equine athletes. Topics of emphasis include exercise-related adaptations in metabolism, locomotion, the cardiovascular system, musculoskeletal system, and endocrine system.  The roles of nutrition and conditioning programs are assessed."Modifying the behavior of the horse using systematic approaches to horse training emphasizing the psychology of training horses. Equipment and its use and preparation of horses for competition.   A maximum of 4 credits of An S 317 may be applied toward graduation.Modifying the behavior of the horse using systematic approaches to horse training emphasizing the psychology of training horses. Equipment and its use and preparation of horses for competition.   A maximum of 4 credits of An S 317 may be applied toward graduation.Modifying the behavior of the horse using systematic approaches to horse training emphasizing the psychology of training horses. Equipment and its use and preparation of horses for competition.   A maximum of 4 credits of An S 317 may be applied toward graduation.Modifying the behavior of the horse using systematic approaches to horse training emphasizing the psychology of training horses. Equipment and its use and preparation of horses for competition.   A maximum of 4 credits of An S 317 may be applied toward graduation."Structure and function of organic and inorganic nutrients.  Digestion, absorption, metabolism and utilization of nutrients for maintenance and productive functions. Essential nutritive requirements of domestic livestock, poultry, and companion animals.  Sources of nutrients, application of energy systems and concepts, and regulation of feed intake in animals.""Composition, physical properties, and storage and processing of feedstuffs. Nutrient requirements of and diet formulation, and preparation systems for food and companion animal species at varying stages of age, activity or production. Manual and computer methodologies for diet formulation.""Food processing and nutrition for carnivorous companion animals. Topics covered include meat processing and meat preservation for companion animal diets, regulatory standards, cutting edge technologies for processing meat for companion animals, dietary needs of carnivorous companion animals, effect of different processing methods on safety and nutrient bioavailability.""Comparative anatomy, physiology, and endocrinology of domestic mammalian animal reproduction. Techniques for the control and manipulation of reproductive processes."Reproductive anatomy with emphasis on the physiology of normal reproductive function; ways to control and improve reproduction; principles of semen collection and artificial insemination; pregnancy testing; selected laboratory exercises with written report.Comparative reproductive anatomy with emphasis on the physiology of normal reproductive function; ways to control and improve reproduction; principles of semen collection and artificial insemination; pregnancy testing; selected laboratory exercises with written report."Reproductive anatomy with emphasis on the physiology of normal reproductive function; breeding season management; ways to control and improve reproduction; semen collection, evaluation, and processing; artificial insemination; pregnancy testing; parturition in the mare, foal care; selected laboratory exercises with written report.""Application of embryo transfer and related technologies to genetic improvement of mammalian livestock. Techniques for control of female reproduction, embryo collection and transfer, embryo cryopreservation, and embryo manipulation. Gender selection. Economic and genetic aspects of embryo transfer.""Selected laboratory exercises related to embryo transfer such as synchronization of estrus, superovulation, detection of estrus, artificial insemination, embryo collection, embryo evaluation, microscopy, embryo cryopreservation, in vitro fertilization, embryo sexing, rectal palpation, and ultrasonography will be demonstrated and/or performed.""Evaluation of breeding animals for dairy herds. Comparative terminology, decision making, and presentation of oral reasons. Trips to dairy cattle farms. Livestock handling.""Principles of behavior relative to animal care, management and environmental design to ensure animal well-being. Examination of basic neural-endocrine mechanisms involved in the animal's response to its environment.  Awareness of animal protection, law and legislation.  Methods to objectively assess animal well-being.""The structure, development and evolution of the mammary gland. Mammary metabolism, milk synthesis; neural and endocrine regulation of mammary function. Immune function and health of the mammary gland. Current events related to lactation.""Basic principles of animal growth and development covered at the tissue, cellular and molecular level.  Emphasis placed on skeletal muscle, adipose, bone, and immune system growth and development.  The effects of genetics, nutrition, and pharmaceuticals on growth."Principles of qualitative and quantitative genetics applied to creating change in domestic animals. Impact of selection and mating schemes in achieving breeding program goals. Applications and impacts of biotechnological advancements in genetic manipulation."Impact of muscle structure, composition, rigor mortis, inspection, fabrication, handling, packaging and cooking on the palatability, nutritional value, yields, market value, and safety of fresh meat.""Response of swine to thermal environment, ventilation system design and analysis, heating and cooling systems, and examples of various designs for all phases of production. Troubleshooting ventilation systems and energy analysis of production units.""Function, application, and advantages and disadvantages of nutrient management systems. Manure production rates, manure handling systems, storage and manure management planning for land application and odor mitigation strategies."Overview of standard biosecurity protocols and identification of behavior and clinical signs of illness in pigs. Treatment administration and prevention methods. Introduction to immune system function and basic swine disease transmission."Learning experience focused on professional development for a career related to animal science. Journal, presentation, and creative component.""Learning experience focused on professional development for a career related to animal science. Journal, presentation, and creative component."Life skill development emphasized in the context of exploring one's perspective of the most pressing moral and scientific issues facing animal agriculture. Clarification and communication of personal conclusions in small and large group settings expected.Identification and development of financial and production goals in a horse business.  Scientific approach to make decisions in management of enterprises in the horse industry."Detailed consideration of digestion, metabolism, and assimilation of nutrients. Recent advances and developments in basic nutrition.""Decisions facing the administrator of a companion animal enterprise. Financial and business goal identification, problem clarification, and resource allocation to manage the companion animal system.""Decisions facing the administrator of a swine enterprise. Financial and production goal identification, problem clarification, and resource allocation to manage the swine enterprise.""Decisions facing the administrator of a beef cow-calf or feedlot enterprise. Financial and production goal identification, problem clarification, and resource allocation to manage the beef enterprise.""Decisions facing the administrator of a sheep enterprise. Financial and production goal identification, problem clarification, and resource allocation to manage the sheep enterprise.""The scientific foundation of dairy cattle management.  The impact of dairy farm management practices on the biological processes of the cow. Integrates concepts from the disciplines of lactation, reproduction, nutrition, genetics, and animal health.""Evaluate nutrition, reproduction, milk quality, breeding, and related management practices of commercial dairy herds in a case study format.  Students will apply knowledge gained in the classroom to commercial dairy farm situations and develop skills in information gathering, decision making, problem solving, and interpersonal communications.""An overview of animal agriculture with emphasis on animal agriculture in developing countries. Historical, economic, environmental; and political considerations will be assessed and evaluated. Issues related to gender, resilience and sustainability for different production systems will be investigated.""Physical, chemical and biological properties of meat important to processed meat product characteristics. Ingredients, technology and equipment used for cured meats, loaf products and fresh, cooked, dry and semi-dry sausage products.""Specialized training in evaluation and grading of livestock, livestock products, and livestock production management plans.   Maximum of 6 credits may be applied toward graduation.""Specialized training in evaluation and grading of livestock, livestock products, and livestock production management plans.   Maximum of 6 credits may be applied toward graduation.""Specialized training in evaluation and grading of livestock, livestock products, and livestock production management plans.   Maximum of 6 credits may be applied toward graduation.""Specialized training in evaluation and grading of livestock, livestock products, and livestock production management plans.   Maximum of 6 credits may be applied toward graduation.""Specialized training in evaluation and grading of livestock, livestock products, and livestock production management plans.   Maximum of 6 credits may be applied toward graduation.""Specialized training in evaluation and grading of livestock, livestock products, and livestock production management plans.   Maximum of 6 credits may be applied toward graduation.""Specialized training in evaluation and grading of livestock, livestock products, and livestock production management plans.   Maximum of 6 credits may be applied toward graduation.""Students broaden their perspective of the livestock industry through site visits, case-study (Fellows) projects, and cooperative learning experiences that capitalize on interaction skills in the context of studying the structure of the U.S. livestock industry.  This for-credit offering represents the central academic focus of the Iowa State University Animal Industry Leadership Fellows Program.  Study is species specific, and enrollment is limited.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Students broaden their perspective of the livestock industry through site visits, case-study (Fellows) projects, and cooperative learning experiences that capitalize on interaction skills in the context of studying the structure of the U.S. livestock industry.  This for-credit offering represents the central academic focus of the Iowa State University Animal Industry Leadership Fellows Program.  Study is species specific, and enrollment is limited.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Students broaden their perspective of the livestock industry through site visits, case-study (Fellows) projects, and cooperative learning experiences that capitalize on interaction skills in the context of studying the structure of the U.S. livestock industry.  This for-credit offering represents the central academic focus of the Iowa State University Animal Industry Leadership Fellows Program.  Study is species specific, and enrollment is limited.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Students broaden their perspective of the livestock industry through site visits, case-study (Fellows) projects, and cooperative learning experiences that capitalize on interaction skills in the context of studying the structure of the U.S. livestock industry. Central academic focus of the Iowa State University Animal Industry Leadership Fellows Program. Study is species specific, and enrollment is limited.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Capstone seminar for the food safety minor. Case discussions and independent projects about safety issues in the food system from a multidisciplinary perspective.Open to juniors and seniors in animal science and dairy science showing satisfactory preparation for problems chosen. Individual topic conference and preparation of report.   A maximum of 6 credits of An S 490 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.Open to juniors and seniors in animal science and dairy science showing satisfactory preparation for problems chosen. Individual topic conference and preparation of report.   A maximum of 6 credits of An S 490 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.Open to juniors and seniors in animal science and dairy science showing satisfactory preparation for problems chosen. Individual topic conference and preparation of report.   A maximum of 6 credits of An S 490 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.Open to juniors and seniors in animal science and dairy science showing satisfactory preparation for problems chosen. Individual topic conference and preparation of report.   A maximum of 6 credits of An S 490 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.Open to juniors and seniors in animal science and dairy science showing satisfactory preparation for problems chosen. Individual topic conference and preparation of report.   A maximum of 6 credits of An S 490 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.Open to juniors and seniors in animal science and dairy science showing satisfactory preparation for problems chosen. Individual topic conference and preparation of report.   A maximum of 6 credits of An S 490 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.Open to juniors and seniors in animal science and dairy science showing satisfactory preparation for problems chosen. Individual topic conference and preparation of report.   A maximum of 6 credits of An S 490 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.Open to juniors and seniors in animal science and dairy science showing satisfactory preparation for problems chosen. Individual topic conference and preparation of report.   A maximum of 6 credits of An S 490 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation.Open to juniors and seniors in animal science and dairy science showing satisfactory preparation for problems chosen. Individual topic conference and preparation of report.   A maximum of 6 credits of An S 490 may be applied toward the total credits required for graduation."Workshop in livestock production. Includes current concepts in breeding, nutrition, reproduction, meats, and technologies that impact the animal industry.""Limited enrollment. Students enrolled in this course will also register for AGRON 495 and intend to register in AGRON 496 and AN S 496 the following term. Topics will include the agricultural industries, climate, crops, culture, history, livestock, marketing, soils, and preparation for travel to locations to be visited. Information normally available 9 months before departure.""Limited enrollment. Students enroll in both AN S 496 and AGRON 496. Tour and study of production methods in major crop and livestock regions of the world. Influence of climate, economics, geography, soils, landscapes, markets, and other factors on livestock and crop production. Locations and duration of tours will vary. Summer tour will usually visit a northern location and winter tour will usually visit a southern location. Information usually available 9 months before departure. Tour expenses paid by students.""Limited enrollment. Students enroll in both AN S 496 and AGRON 496. Tour and study of production methods in major crop and livestock regions of the world. Influence of climate, economics, geography, soils, landscapes, markets, and other factors on livestock and crop production. Locations and duration of tours will vary. Summer tour will usually visit a northern location and winter tour will usually visit a southern location. Information usually available 9 months before departure. Tour expenses paid by students.""Limited enrollment. Students enroll in both AN S 496 and AGRON 496. Tour and study of production methods in major crop and livestock regions of the world. Influence of climate, economics, geography, soils, landscapes, markets, and other factors on livestock and crop production. Locations and duration of tours will vary. Summer tour will usually visit a northern location and winter tour will usually visit a southern location. Information usually available 9 months before departure. Tour expenses paid by students.""Development of oral and written communication skills of technical concepts in animal science. Emphasis on organizational skills, conducting activities and interpersonal communication skills. Responsibilities in a class under direct supervision of a faculty member.   A maximum of 4 credits of An S 497 may be applied toward graduation.""Introduction to UNIX and SAS for solving research problems, including organization of data files, transfer of files between workstations, developing models, and techniques for analysis of designed experiments. Introduction to matrix algebra for solving animal breeding problems using MATLAB and computer simulation.""First half semester course. Introduction to UNIX and SAS for solving research problems, including organization of data files, transfer of files between workstations, developing models, and techniques for analysis of designed experiments. Introduction to matrix algebra for solving animal breeding problems using MATLAB and computer simulation.""Second half semester course. Introduction to UNIX and SAS for solving research problems, including organization of data files, transfer of files between workstations, developing models, and techniques for analysis of designed experiments. Introduction to matrix algebra for solving animal breeding problems using MATLAB and computer simulation."Required for Animal Science graduate students. Orientation to departmental and graduate school policies and procedures. Discussion of programs of research and outreach in Animal Science. Issues impacting the animal industry.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Discussion and evaluation of current topics in animal production and management."Methods to maintain productivity and minimize the negative ecological effects of agricultural systems by understanding nutrient cycles, managing manure and crop residue, and utilizing multispecies interactions. Crop and livestock production within landscapes and watersheds is also considered. Course includes a significant field component, with student teams analyzing Iowa farms."Digestion and metabolism of nutrients. Nutritional requirements and current research and feeding programs for poultry and swine.Digestive physiology and nutrient metabolism in ruminant and preruminant animals."Development of structure and function of the reproductive system. Physiologic and endocrine aspects including puberty, gametogenesis, estrous cycle, pregnancy, maternal recognition, fertilization and early embryonic development."Regulation of metabolism and development in the mammalian fetus and neonate is explored in a comparative manner.  Emphasis will be on the dynamic changes in these relationships occurring at birth."Each semester, the studentsÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ focus is on different topics related to animal behavior, animal welfare and contemporary issues related to animal behavior and welfare. Each topic is separate and distinct, and students may enroll in multiple topics. This is an on-line course only. Each topic may be taken only one time for credit.""Each semester, the studentsÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ focus is on different topics related to animal behavior, animal welfare and contemporary issues related to animal behavior and welfare. Each topic is separate and distinct, and students may enroll in multiple topics. This is an on-line course only. Each topic may be taken only one time for credit.""Each semester, the studentsÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ focus is on different topics related to animal behavior, animal welfare and contemporary issues related to animal behavior and welfare. Each topic is separate and distinct, and students may enroll in multiple topics. This is an on-line course only. Each topic may be taken only one time for credit.""Each semester, the studentsÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ focus is on different topics related to animal behavior, animal welfare and contemporary issues related to animal behavior and welfare. Each topic is separate and distinct, and students may enroll in multiple topics. This is an on-line course only. Each topic may be taken only one time for credit.""Each semester, the studentsÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ focus is on different topics related to animal behavior, animal welfare and contemporary issues related to animal behavior and welfare. Each topic is separate and distinct, and students may enroll in multiple topics. This is an on-line course only. Each topic may be taken only one time for credit."Basic concepts and contemporary topics in genetic regulation of livestock immune response and disease resistance."Overview of mammalian physiology. Cell biology, endocrinology, cardiovascular, respiratory, immune, digestive, skeletal muscle and reproductive systems.""Cardiovascular, renal, respiratory, and digestive physiology."Introduction to principles and methodology of molecular genetics useful in analyzing and modifying large genomes."Physical, chemical and biological properties of meat important to processed meat product characteristics. Ingredients, technology and equipment used for cured meats, loaf products and fresh, cooked, dry and semi-dry sausage products.""Population and quantitative genetics for plant and animal genetics. Study of the genetic basis and analysis of variation in quantitative traits in domestic or experimental populations using phenotypic and molecular marker data, including estimation of heritability and other genetic parameters, linkage analysis and mapping of quantitative trait loci, and the impact of inbreeding, heterosis, and genotype-by-environment interaction.""Basic theory for genetic analysis of animal breeding data. Course A (1st half semester) covers linear models, selection index methods, and basic theory for best linear unbiased prediction. Course B (2nd half semester) best linear unbiased prediction, including genetic groups, environmental adjustment, repeated records, multiple trait models, maternal effects models, and theory for maximum likelihood estimation of genetic parameters.""Basic theory for genetic analysis of animal breeding data. Course A (1st half semester) covers linear models, selection index methods, and basic theory for best linear unbiased prediction. Course B (2nd half semester) best linear unbiased prediction, including genetic groups, environmental adjustment, repeated records, multiple trait models, maternal effects models, and theory for maximum likelihood estimation of genetic parameters.""Basic theory for genetic analysis of animal breeding data. Course A (1st half semester) covers linear models, selection index methods, and basic theory for best linear unbiased prediction. Course B (2nd half semester) best linear unbiased prediction, including genetic groups, environmental adjustment, repeated records, multiple trait models, maternal effects models, and theory for maximum likelihood estimation of genetic parameters.""Ante and postmortem factors impacting composition, structure, and chemistry of red meat and poultry muscle/meat, the conversion of muscle to meat, and the sensory and nutritional attributes of fresh meats. Oral research reports and a research proposal.""Physical/chemical relationships during processing. Effects of modern technology, non-meat additives and preservation techniques on quality and safety of processed meat. Laboratory demonstration of principles and technology.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""Special topics in the animal sciences, offered on demand and may be conducted by guest professors.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee."Discussion of current literature; preparation and submission of abstracts."Understanding molecular aspects of vitamin and mineral metabolism and homeostasis in humans and animals.  An in-depth examination of the chemistry of vitamins and minerals, including genetic mutations, proteins involved in absorption and excretion, and their necessity in biological processes.""Digestion, absorption, and intermediary metabolism of amino acids and protein. Regulation of protein synthesis and degradation. Integration of cellular biochemistry and physiology of mammalian protein metabolism."Energy constituents of feedstuffs and energy needs of animals as related to cellular biochemistry and physiology. Interpretations of classical and current research.Discussion of current literature and preparation of reports and seminars on selected topics concerning animal physiology."Basic concepts and methods for design and evaluation of genetic improvement programs for livestock. Topic A. (1st half semester) Prediction of response to selection, selection index theory, multiple trait selection, inbreeding, crossbreeding, and marker-assisted selection.  Topic B. (2nd half semester) Advanced concepts in design and evaluation of animal breeding programs, including modeling and optimization, derivation of economic values, gene-flow, and predicting rates of inbreeding.   Each topic may be taken only one time for academic credit.""Basic concepts and methods for design and evaluation of genetic improvement programs for livestock. Topic A. (1st half semester) Prediction of response to selection, selection index theory, multiple trait selection, inbreeding, crossbreeding, and marker-assisted selection.  Topic B. (2nd half semester) Advanced concepts in design and evaluation of animal breeding programs, including modeling and optimization, derivation of economic values, gene-flow, and predicting rates of inbreeding.   Each topic may be taken only one time for academic credit.""Basic concepts and methods for design and evaluation of genetic improvement programs for livestock. Topic A. (1st half semester) Prediction of response to selection, selection index theory, multiple trait selection, inbreeding, crossbreeding, and marker-assisted selection.  Topic B. (2nd half semester) Advanced concepts in design and evaluation of animal breeding programs, including modeling and optimization, derivation of economic values, gene-flow, and predicting rates of inbreeding.   Each topic may be taken only one time for academic credit.""Industrial applications of breeding systems, selection methods, and new genetic technologies. One or more field trips to an industry breeding company.""Industrial applications of breeding systems, selection methods, and new genetic technologies. One or more field trips to an industry breeding company.""Industrial applications of breeding systems, selection methods, and new genetic technologies. One or more field trips to an industry breeding company."Computational methods and strategies for analysis of large data sets with animal breeding data for use in research and industry applications. Course A (1st half semester) Strategies for handling large sets and for prediction using best linear unbiased prediction using a formal language and utility programs. Course B (2nd half semester) Strategies for estimation of genetic parameters and for use of non-linear models for genetic analysis of categorical and survival type data.Computational methods and strategies for analysis of large data sets with animal breeding data for use in research and industry applications. Strategies for handling large sets and for prediction using best linear unbiased prediction using a formal language and utility programs.Computational methods and strategies for analysis of large data sets with animal breeding data for use in research and industry applications. Strategies for estimation of genetic parameters and for use of non-linear models for genetic analysis of categorical and survival type data.Statistical methods for mapping quantitative trait loci in out-bred populations. Methods based on modeling covariances between relatives. Likelihood based methods using half-sib and full-sib families and extended pedigrees. Bayesian methods applied.Presentation of current research related to animal breeding and genetics."Ultrastructure of muscle; chemistry, structure, function, and molecular biology of muscle proteins. Molecular aspects of muscle contraction, development and turnover. Cytoskeletal proteins and dynamics."Discussion and evaluation of current topics in research publications in meat science.Reports and discussion of recent literature and current investigations."Reports and discussion of current issues and research in animal science.  One credit is required for all M.S. degree candidates with graduate majors in the Department of Animal Science, and two credits are required for all Ph.D. candidates with graduate majors in the Department of Animal Science.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Comparative study of culture as key to understanding human behaviors in different societies. Using a global, cross-cultural perspective, patterns of family life, economic and political activities, religious beliefs, and the ways in which cultures change are examined.""Human biological and cultural evolution; survey of the evidence from fossil primates, the human fossil record and the archaeological   record, as well as living primates; introduction to research methods in archaeology and biological anthropology.""An introduction to the key global issues in sustainability. Focuses on interconnected roles of energy, materials, human resources, economics, and technology in building and maintaining sustainable systems. Applications discussed will include challenges in both the developed and developing world and will examine the role of technology in a resource-constrained world.   Cannot be used for technical elective credit in any engineering department.""An introduction to understanding key global issues in the contemporary world. Focuses on social relations, cultural practices and political-economic linkages among Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe and the Pacific.""Survey of the major theoretical, methodological and empirical foundations of cultural anthropology.  Participatory lab:  focus on ethnographic methods through individual research projects.""Human evolution as known from fossil evidence, comparative primate studies, and genetic variations in living populations. Laboratory-tutorial sessions include study and discussion of human osteology, fossil hominids, simple Mendelian traits, and bio-ethics in applied biological anthropology.""Methods and techniques for the recovery and interpretation of archaeological evidence, its role in reconstructing human behavior   and past environments. Laboratory sessions include experience in the interpretation of archaeological evidence, the use of   classification systems, and prehistoric technologies such as ceramics and stone tools.""Introduction to study of language, culture and society from an anthropological perspective. Focus on language and thought,   ethnography of speaking, discourse and narrative, writing and literacy, and media communication. Discussion of key theories and   methods of linguistic anthropology.""Comparative and historical overview of the family, marriage and kinship. Examination of cross-cultural differences in the   construction and functioning of family and kin relations; role of kinship in structuring individual and collective activities; current   critical and theoretical issues in kinship studies, especially integrating work on gender and sexuality."Prehistory and early history of North America as reconstructed from archaeological evidence; peopling of the New World; culture-  historical sequences of major culture areas; linkages of archaeological traditions with selected ethnohistorically known Native   American groups."Comprehensive study of the skeletal anatomy, physiology, genetics, growth, development and population variation of the human skeleton. Applications to forensic anthropology, paleopathology and bioarchaeology are introduced.""Prehistoric societies of the Great Plains region of North America, from initial occupation to European contact; emphasis on   sociocultural changes, continuities, and adaptations to changing environments using archaeological, ecological, ethnographic   information.""An introduction to archaeological sites from around the world including the Near East, Africa, Europe, Mesoamerica, and North and South America. Emphasis is on the interpretation of material cultural remains in reconstructing past societies.""Origin, distribution, and pre-contact life of the indigenous peoples of North America. Survey of culture areas; language families,   social and political systems, ecological and economic adaptations, religion and spirituality; impact of European contact;  cultural   resilience and revitalization in contemporary American Indian life."Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered."Origins and distribution of peoples of Africa; geographical characteristics as related to culture types, including early civilizations; a comparative examination of economic, subsistence, language, social and political organization, and religious systems throughout the continent; change processes, the impact of colonialism, and the nature of contemporary African societies.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation."Examination of material objects made and used by Asian Americans with both historical and contemporary focuses; transnational and interdisciplinary lenses to interpret the material world; contemporary approaches to analysis of artifacts."Cross-cultural analysis of current development practices from an anthropological perspective; focus on international aid,   development institutions, agrarian reform, indigenous knowledge, humanitarianism and human rights; introduction to main theories   of political and economic anthropology.""Survey of global religious belief and practice from an anthropological perspective. Emphasis on myth and ritual, shamanism, magic,   witchcraft, beliefs in spirits, conceptions of the soul, mind and body relationships, and healing and therapeutic practices. Discussion   of religious response to dramatic political and social change; effects of globalization on religious practice.""An introduction to the Order Primates with a focus on their behavior.  Biological and social adaptations of monkeys, apes, and prosimians; basic evolutionary concepts, current trends and theories in the field of Primatology and issues related to primate conservation."Humanitarianism as a system of thought and a system of intervention in conflict and post-conflict situations: role of humanitarian organizations and actors in addressing human suffering caused by conflict or war military action as a form of humanitarian intervention."Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Greece-Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Greek or Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored.""Bronze Age (Minoan and Mycenaean palatial cultures) and Early Iron Age Greece. (ca 3000-700 BCE). Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Greece-Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Greek or Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored.""Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Greece-Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Greek or Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored.""Theoretical and practical considerations of applying anthropological knowledge to contemporary cultural, political and economic   issues. Dynamics of directed change in contemporary world cultures. Principles, theories, and ethics of international development   projects from a sociocultural perspective.""Cross-cultural study of the impact of globalization, with an emphasis on economic consumption and the movement of goods, ideas, and peoples across cultural and national boundaries.""In-depth study of current topics in cultural anthropology, such as recent theoretical trends, new methodologies, or new research on a specific region. Topics vary each time offered. Each section may be taken once for credit up to 9 credits.   No more than 9 credits of ANTHR 419 courses may be applied towards graduation.""In-depth study of current topics in cultural anthropology, such as recent theoretical trends, new methodologies, or new research on a specific region. Topics vary each time offered.   No more than 9 credits of ANTHR 419 courses may be applied towards graduation.""In-depth study of current topics in cultural anthropology, such as recent theoretical trends, new methodologies, or new research on a specific region. Topics vary each time offered.   No more than 9 credits of ANTHR 419 courses may be applied towards graduation.""In-depth study of current topics in cultural anthropology, such as recent theoretical trends, new methodologies, or new research on a specific region. Topics vary each time offered.   No more than 9 credits of ANTHR 419 courses may be applied towards graduation.""In-depth study of current topics in cultural anthropology, such as recent theoretical trends, new methodologies, or new research on a specific region. Topics vary each time offered.   No more than 9 credits of ANTHR 419 courses may be applied towards graduation.""Comprehensive study of forensic anthropology, a specialized subfield of biological anthropology. Emphasis is placed on personal   identifications from extremely fragmentary, comingled, burnt, cremated and incomplete skeletal remains. All parameters of forensic   study are included as they pertain to anthropology, including human variation, taphonomy, entomology, archaeology, pathology,   epidemiology; genetics and the non-biological forensic disciplines. An appreciation for the wide range of medicolegal and bioethical   issues will also be gained.""Instruction and guidance in the development of professional skills needed for success in academic and non-academic   anthropological careers.  Topics will include strategies for internship and job searches, creating resumes and CVs, composing   personal statements and cover letters, and developing contacts and sources.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Nature of cultural and environmental evidence in archaeology and how they are used to model past human behavior and land use; emphasis on Iowa prehistory; basic reconnaissance surveying and excavation techniques."Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition and organization, and computer applications.""Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition and organization, and computer applications.""Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition and organization, and computer applications.""Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition and organization, and computer applications.""Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition and organization, and computer applications."Summer field school for training in archaeological reconnaissance and excavation techniques; documentation and interpretation of archaeological evidence."Hands-on training in ethnographic field methods; students will carry out research projects in socio-cultural anthropology, learning   a variety of investigative research techniques commonly used in social sciences.""Supervised practice in government agencies, museums, and business organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Not more than 6 credits of internship experience may count towards the major. No credits in Anthr 434 may be used to satisfy Anthropology core courses for majors or for the Anthropology minor.""Supervised practice in government agencies, museums, and business organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Not more than 6 credits of internship experience may count towards the major. No credits in Anthr 434 may be used to satisfy Anthropology core courses for majors or for the Anthropology minor.""Supervised practice in government agencies, museums, and business organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Not more than 6 credits of internship experience may count towards the major. No credits in Anthr 434 may be used to satisfy Anthropology core courses for majors or for the Anthropology minor.""Supervised practice in government agencies, museums, and business organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Not more than 6 credits of internship experience may count towards the major. No credits in Anthr 434 may be used to satisfy Anthropology core courses for majors or for the Anthropology minor.""Supervised practice in government agencies, museums, and business organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Not more than 6 credits of internship experience may count towards the major. No credits in Anthr 434 may be used to satisfy Anthropology core courses for majors or for the Anthropology minor.""Primate behavior and ecology in evolutionary perspective: biological and social adaptations of prosimians, monkeys, and apes. Introduction to the Order Primates, basic evolutionary concepts, and techniques of behavioral observation. Focus on theory and methods current in Primatology, including applied conservation biology.""Cross-cultural examination of the social construction of genders out of the biological fact of sex. Emphasis on non-western societies. Topics, presented through examination of ethnographic data, will include the range of gender variation, status and roles, the institution of marriage, and symbols of gender valuation.""Summer field school for training in behavioral and ecological methods for primatologists. Proposal, data collection and analyses, and presentation of research topic in primatology."Survey of the historical foundations of anthropology and its interrelated four sub-fields; key figures in 19th and 20th century anthropology with a focus on major theoretical contributions."Application of methods under actual laboratory and field conditions, including basic data management, synthesis, and analysis.""Application of methods under actual laboratory and field conditions, including basic data management, synthesis, and analysis.""Application of methods under actual laboratory and field conditions, including basic data management, synthesis, and analysis.""Application of methods under actual laboratory and field conditions, including basic data management, synthesis, and analysis.""Application of methods under actual laboratory and field conditions, including basic data management, synthesis, and analysis.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates."No more than 9 credits of Anthr 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of Anthr 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of Anthr 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of Anthr 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of Anthr 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of Anthr 490 may be counted toward graduation."Research opportunities for undergraduate students in the biological sciences.   No more than 9 credits in Biol 490 may be counted toward graduation and of those, only 6 credits may be applied to the major.""History of biological anthropology and archaeology, current developments and theoretical issues related to major events in human biocultural evolution and world prehistory.""Experiential, interdisciplinary examination of Midwestern agricultural and food systems, emphasizing field visits, with some classroom activities.  Focus on understanding multiple elements, perspectives (agronomic, economic, ecologic, social, etc.) and scales of operation."Survey of historical and current developments in topical and theoretical approaches to sociocultural anthropology. Examination and assessment of controversies; new research directions and theoretical approaches."Theoretical and practical considerations of applying anthropological knowledge to contemporary cultural, political and economic   issues. Dynamics of directed change in contemporary world cultures. Principles, theories, and ethics of international development   projects from a sociocultural perspective.""Comparative and historical overview of the family, marriage and kinship. Examination of cross-cultural differences in the   construction and functioning of family and kin relations; role of kinship in structuring individual and collective activities; current   critical and theoretical issues in kinship studies, especially integrating work on gender and sexuality."Prehistory and early history of North America as reconstructed from archaeological evidence; peopling of the New World; culture-  historical sequences of major culture areas; linkages of archaeological traditions with selected ethnohistorically known Native   American groups."Cross-cultural study of the impact of globalization, with an emphasis on economic consumption and the movement of goods, ideas, and peoples across cultural and national boundaries.""Comprehensive study of the skeletal anatomy, physiology, genetics, growth, development and population variation of the human skeleton. Applications to forensic anthropology, paleopathology and bioarchaeology are introduced.""Prehistoric societies of the Great Plains region of North America, from initial occupation to European contact; emphasis on   sociocultural changes, continuities, and adaptations to changing environments using archaeological, ecological, ethnographic   information.""An introduction to archaeological sites from around the world including the Near East, Africa, Europe, Mesoamerica, and North and South America. Emphasis is on the interpretation of material cultural remains in reconstructing past societies.""Origin, distribution, and pre-contact life of the indigenous peoples of North America. Survey of culture areas; language families,   social and political systems, ecological and economic adaptations, religion and spirituality; impact of European contact;  cultural   resilience and revitalization in contemporary American Indian life."Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current anthropological   approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current anthropological   approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Latin American Anthropology; discussion of current   anthropological approaches to studying Latin American social issues in a global context. Topics vary each time offered."Comprehensive study of forensic anthropology, a specialized subfield of biological anthropology. Emphasis is placed on personal   identifications from extremely fragmentary, comingled, burnt, cremated and incomplete skeletal remains. All parameters of forensic   study are included as they pertain to anthropology, including human variation, taphonomy, entomology, archaeology, pathology,   epidemiology; genetics and the non-biological forensic disciplines. An appreciation for the wide range of medicolegal and bioethical   issues will also be gained.""Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition organization, and computer applications.""Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition organization, and computer applications.""Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition organization, and computer applications.""Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition organization, and computer applications.""Laboratory processing, analysis, and interpretation of archaeological materials such as lithics, ceramics, and faunal remains. Laboratory sessions emphasize analytical techniques including classification, data acquisition organization, and computer applications."Summer field school for training in archaeological reconnaissance and excavation techniques; documentation and interpretation of archaeological evidence.Field training experience in ethnography. Problems emphasizing field studies in the contemporary societies of the world. Focus on techniques of data gathering and analysis."Hands-on training in ethnographic field methods; students will carry out research projects in socio-cultural anthropology, learning   a variety of investigative research techniques commonly used in social sciences.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Exploration of key contemporary and historical issues in Native North America; discussion of current anthropological approaches to studying Native North America in a global context. Topics vary each time offered.   Only 9 credits of ANTHR/AM IN 332A, 332B, 332C, 332D may count toward graduation.""Cross-cultural analysis of current development practices from an anthropological perspective; focus on international aid,   development institutions, agrarian reform, indigenous knowledge, humanitarianism and human rights; introduction to main theories   of political and economic anthropology.""Primate behavior and ecology in evolutionary perspective: biological and social adaptations of prosimians, monkeys, and apes. Introduction to the Order Primates, basic evolutionary concepts, and techniques of behavioral observation. Focus on theory and methods current in Primatology, including applied conservation biology.""Survey of global religious belief and practice from an anthropological perspective. Emphasis on myth and ritual, shamanism, magic,   witchcraft, beliefs in spirits, conceptions of the soul, mind and body relationships, and healing and therapeutic practices. Discussion   of religious response to dramatic political and social change; effects of globalization on religious practice.""Seminars by professional criminalists, research scientists, Certificate students, and educators. Emphasis on opportunities for   research and development, citizen involvement, and educational outreach related to forensic science. Weekly report required.""Research topic approved by course instructor. Written and oral reports required. Oral report given in forensics seminar, Chem 540.""Cross-cultural examination of the social construction of genders out of the biological fact of sex. Emphasis on non-western societies. Topics, presented through examination of ethnographic data, will include the range of gender variation, status and roles, the institution of marriage, and symbols of gender valuation.""Summer field school for training in behavioral and ecological methods for primatologists. Proposal, data collection and analyses, and presentation of research topic in primatology.""An introduction to the Order Primates with a focus on their behavior.  Biological and social adaptations of monkeys, apes, and prosimians; basic evolutionary concepts, current trends and theories in the field of Primatology and issues related to primate conservation.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates.""In-depth study of current topics in biological anthropology, such as new fossil specimens, research on the evolution of cognition, the emergence of applied primatology, and the dynamic field of population genetics as each relates to the Order Primates.""Introduction to the Anthropology program, including the requirements for successful degree completion, department administrative procedures, ethics in anthropology and current trends in the four subfields of anthropology. Required of graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Historical, biophysical, socioeconomic, and ethical dimensions of agricultural sustainability. Strategies for evaluating existing and emerging agricultural systems in terms of the core concepts of sustainability and their theoretical contexts."Orientation policies and procedures of university and college.  Guest speakers representing the university.  Some online lectures."Career exploration, presentation and professional skills, teamwork and leadership, creativity, critical thinking, technology, and service learning components.  Orientation to policies and procedures of college, department, and program.""EVENT and HSP M career exploration, presentation and professional skills, teamwork and leadership, creativity, critical thinking, technology, and service learning components.  Orientation to policies and procedures of CHS college; AESHM department; and Event Management adn Hospitality Management programs.""AMD career exploration, presentation and professional skills, teamwork and leadership, creativity, critical thinking, technology, and service learning components.  Orientation to policies and procedures of CHS college, AESHM department, and AMD program.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Using an online delivery method, students will learn basic mathematical concepts, calculations and formulas commonly used in the apparel and hospitality industries. Emphasis on problem solving, critical/creative thinking, and mathematical interpretation of calculations and formulas used within the apparel and hospitality industries.""Using an online delivery method, students will learn basic mathematical concepts, calculations and formulas commonly used in the apparel and hospitality industries. Emphasis on problem solving, critical/creative thinking, and mathematical interpretation of calculations and formulas used within the hospitality industries.""Using an online delivery method, students will learn basic mathematical concepts, calculations and formulas commonly used in the apparel and hospitality industries. Emphasis on problem solving, critical/creative thinking, and mathematical interpretation of calculations and formulas used within the apparel industries.""Introduction to leadership behaviors.  Development and utilization of leadership behaviors to positively impact school life, community life, and work life.""Focus on creative thinking concepts, strategies, and methods.  Systematic application of creative thinking techniques to:  view things from different perspectives; identify unique opportunities; solve problems; generate and evaluate original ideas.  Field trips might be required.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, AESHM 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits total from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Planning and production of fashion show including developing budgets, public relations, advertising, fund-raising, choreography, staging, lighting, and food.  Promotion of fashion show and similar events.   Maximum of 4 credits can be applied to graduation"Orientation to the field study location during the semester preceding the trip.Orientation to the field study location during the semester preceding the trip."Introduction to management concepts and principles with application to human sciences-related businesses and organizations. Includes service quality management, professionalism, and social responsibility.""Internship and career planning, professional expectations and responsibilities. RÌÄå©sumÌÄå© development, cover letters, interviewing techniques, and business etiquette.""Internship and career planning, professional expectations and responsibilities.  RÌÄå©sumÌÄå© development, cover letters, interviewing techniques, and business etiquette.""Internship and career planning, professional expectations and responsibilities. RÌÄå©sumÌÄå© development, cover letters, interviewing techniques, and business etiquette.""Application of marketing principles to the hospitality-, events-, and apparel-related industries.  Emphasis on the role of marketing in an organization's overall strategic planning.  Development and evaluation techniques available to hospitality, events, apparel, and related businesses, including advertising, sales promotion, packaging, and public relations.""Design principles, aesthetic concepts, and research applied to consumer experiences, with an emphasis on hospitality and retail environments and events.  Influence of individual differences and cultural patterns on aesthetic preferences."Study of family and community social issues from diverse perspectives. Application of critical thinking and reflection to issues with a focus on leadership within the community."Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the AESHM Department. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Hospitality Management program.  Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the majors in the Event Management program.  Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Apparel, Merchandising, and Design program.  Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the AESHM Department. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Hospitality Management program.  Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Event Management major.  Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Apparel, Merchandising, and Design major.  Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required."Required of all cooperative education students seeking full-time status. Students register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Trends, issues, and scholarship in apparel, events, and hospitality management.""Trends, issues, and scholarship in events and hospitality management.""Trends, issues, and scholarship in apparel.""Development of leadership in a global environment.  Focus on global concerns that impact on the well-being of individuals, families, and communities.  Strategies for working with individuals, families and communities in other countries and cultures.  Taking local action on global issues.  Participation in a service activity."Principles and practices of human resource management relevant to human science-related organizations.  Emphasis on the entry-level manager's role.Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization."Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Supervised work experience with a cooperating firm or organization.   No more than 12 credits from AESHM 170, 270, and 470 may be applied toward graduation.""Provide leadership and communicate direction for planning and production of fashion show, including developing budgets, publicity, advertising, fundraising, choreography, staging, lighting, and food.""Comprehensive approach to entrepreneurship including concepts of innovation, creativity, opportunity assessment, and business planning.  Focus on human sciences-related businesses: retail, service, hospitality, event, food-related, family-owned, rural, and community businesses. Interaction with entrepreneurs, market research, feasibility analysis, business proposals, and business/community outreach and consulting."Overview of research methods. Methods for collecting and analyzing quantitative and qualitative data. Development of research plan.Discussion of scholarship and current issues. Topics vary.Supervised experience related to career objective. Proposal must be approved semester before placement.Supervised experience related to career objective. Proposal must be approved semester before placement.Supervised experience related to career objective. Proposal must be approved semester before placement."Comprehensive approach to entrepreneurship including concepts of innovation, creativity, opportunity assessment, and business planning.  Focus on human sciences-related businesses: retail, service, hospitality, event, food-related, family-owned, rural, and community businesses. Interaction with entrepreneurs, market research, feasibility analysis, business proposals, and business/community outreach and consulting.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the AESHM Department. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Hospitality Management program. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Event Management program. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Apparel, Merchandising, and Design program. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the AESHM Department. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the AESHM Department. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Event Management program. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required.""Study and tours of areas of interest to majors in the Apparel, Merchandising, and Design. Trip to location under supervision of faculty member. Locations and lengths of trip vary. Final projects, reports, journal entries, and analysis are required."Scholarship and current issues. Topics vary.Supervised experience in the university classroom. Proposal must be approved semester before placement.Supervised experience in the university classroom. Proposal must be approved semester before placement.Supervised experience in the university classroom. Proposal must be approved semester before placement."Assemble components and completed garments with the use of basic sewing equipment. Learn basic construction techniques, applications and vocabulary. Students will need access to a home sewing machine, iron, computer and the internet. Not available for credit for A M D majors.""Principles of garment assembly. Use of mass production equipment and methods to analyze, develop and assemble garments.""Introduction to fashion industry, industry structure from concept to consumer.  Focus on fashion-driven consumer goods."Examination of diversity among consumers and introduction to forecasting trends in dress.  Introduction to social justice issues."Introduction to the elements and principles of design in fashion and apparel including skill development in fashion illustration, technical drawing, and fabric rendering using traditional media.  Application of written and verbal presentations to communicate fashion and apparel design concepts.  Fashion presentation and introduction to portfolio development.""Textile fibers, yarns, fabrication, coloration, and finishes.  Quality and performance application to consumer soft goods and technical textiles.  Online components and lab work.""Project review and skill assessment related to 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional visualization, apparel assembly, basic product knowledge, design problem solving, illustration, textiles.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Only one credit in 206 may be counted towards graduation.""Applications of basic skills in Photoshop, Illustrator, PLM-type software, Excel, and databases.  Introduction to digital product design and line development.  Focus on elements and principles of design.  Introduction to digital portfolio development for design and merchandising.  Online lectures.""Application of patternmaking tools and their functions, measurement techniques, pattern labeling, and patternmaking communication documents.  Sloper drafting and flat pattern manipulation methods for women's apparel.  Design and construction of original garments using drafted slopers and flat pattern manipulation methods to enable the analysis of fit.""Analysis of apparel product development, sourcing, and manufacturing processes.  Focus on materials and specifications relative to quality, performance, cost, and price.  Applications of software for PLM.""Elements and principles of design. Analysis of sensory, expressive, and symbolic aspects that build brand image, with a focus on fashion products and promotional settings.""Overview of museums including history, functions, and philosophy.  Collection and curatorial practices.  Funding and governance issues.  Hands-on object research and exhibit development.  Required field trip.""Principles of merchandising as applied to retail-, service-, events-, and hospitality-related businesses.  Study of the planning, development, and presentation of apparel- and hospitality-related products, services, and experiences.  Industry and market research, planning of new offerings, and development of promotional and competitive strategies for various retail formats.""Development of fashion plates and focused apparel lines/collections.  Proficiency in drawing the fashion figure, technical drawings/flats, and apparel using a variety of media.  Continuation of fashion presentation and portfolio development.""Principles of product and materials evaluation and quality assurance. Developing specifications and using standard practices for evaluating materials, product characteristics, performance, and quality.""Computer-aided design technology used in apparel sketching, pattern drafting, grading, and marker making."Analysis and advanced use of computer-aided design software for textile and fashion design for various target markets.  Digital presentation and portfolio development.Principles of patternmaking through basic draping techniques on industry standard body forms.  Apparel design through analysis of fit and design; problem solving and interaction of fabric characteristics with style features."Focus on artisanal textile, apparel, or surface and structural design techniques.  Design processes for specialty fabrics and markets.  Topics vary by term.""Survey of history of dress from ancient times up to the American Civil War; focus on European and North American dress. Emphasis on connection of dress to the social, cultural, environmental, and technological contexts of the Western world.""Survey of major design and technological developments from the American Civil War through the 20th Century. Emphasis on fashion as a system of design and production, culture of consumption, fashion change, and trends in art, society, and culture.""Analysis of multiple factors related to dress in selected societies, including technology, cultural identity, aesthetics, social organization, ritual, stability and change. Applications to fair trade and social responsibility.""Evaluation of key issues facing textile and apparel industries in global markets considering ethical, economic, political, social, and professional implications.  Sourcing strategies in a global environment.  Corporate and consumer social responsibility and sustainability.""Calculations and computer application in the planning and control of merchandise.  Emphasis on retail math as it pertains to assortment planning, the six-month buying plan process, and other buying concepts and strategies.  Online modules.""Principles of brand development and management; emphasis on branding, visual merchandising, design/layout of retail spaces.  Includes merchandising technology applications such as Adobe Creative Suite and retail-related case studies."Theories and principles of textile science.  Emphasis on fiber structure on fabric properties and performance; new developments in textiles."Garment development and analysis of fit, performance, quality, cost. Exploration of alternative materials, construction methods, grading; specifications and portfolio development.""Exploration of the creative process and sources of inspiration with emphasis on wearable art; experimentation of advanced design problem solving, alternative materials, fabric manipulation, and pattern-making techniques.""Procedures and experiences related to application and use of process controls: method analysis, work measurement, costing, pricing, and production planning. Resource management, technology applications, and quality assurance.""Condition assessment, repair, and stabilization of textiles and apparel in museum collections.  Dry and aqueous cleaning.  Examination of storage and exhibition techniques, materials, and conditions.  Experience with cataloging and management practices.""Application of concepts and theories from the social sciences to the study of consumer behavior related to dress, textile and apparel products, and retail experiences. Experience in conducting consumer research.""Evaluation of information needed to make effective retail decisions.  Use of technology in analyzing and interpreting retail systems data.  Application of concepts related to forecasting, consumer demand, assortment planning, market research, data mining, database interface, pattern recognition, supply-chain/logistics management, retail technology applications such as Visual Retailing, PLM, and Sourcing Simulator.""A customer-centric view of marketing with a focus on the retailer-customer relationship and online strategies.  Integration of key characteristics of online and offline marketing including store formats, e-commerce, catalog, TV, mobile, and direct sales."Independent Study.Creation of an apparel line from target market research to prototypes through the use of manual techniques and CAD technologies.  The line is to be included in a professional portfolio and pieces submitted to a juried exhibition."Applying consumer, aesthetic, and quantitative trend information to develop value-added apparel/textile products and product lines with merchandising/promotion campaigns for diverse target markets. Multi-function team projects. Presentation to industry representatives."Research experience in textiles and clothing with application to a selected problem.Theories and principles of textile science.  Emphasis on fiber structure on fabric properties and performance; new developments in textiles."Principles of product and materials evaluation and quality assurance. Developing specifications and using standard practices for evaluating materials, product characteristics, performance, and quality. Proposal and research project.""Overview of scholarship in textiles and clothing with emphasis on current and future directions.  Fundamentals of writing literature reviews.  Examination of ethical issues in scholarship and academic life.  Introduction to creativity, sustainability, and entrepreneurship.  Development of teaching units.""Digital technologies in textile and apparel design. Theories and practices of mass customization and personalization, digital textile printing, 3D body scanning, creating avatars from body scans, and fitting digital apparel designs.""Exploration of the creative process and sources of inspiration with emphasis on wearable art; experimentation of advanced design problem solving, alternative materials, fabric manipulation, and pattern-making techniques.""Focus on artisanal textile, apparel, or surface and structural design techniques.  Design processes for specialty fabrics and markets.  Topics vary by term.""Examination of hedonic nature of consumer experience and its application to experiential design and branding of retail/hospitality establishments. Emphasis on consumer behavior, environmental psychology, and marketing literature.""Condition assessment, repair, and stabilization of textiles and apparel in museum collections.  Dry and aqueous cleaning.  Examination of storage and exhibition techniques, materials, and conditions.  Experience with cataloging and management practices.""Overview of current sustainability theory, research, and methodology.  Emphasis on the evaluation and discussion of current sustainability literature and sustainable practice of apparel, textiles, and related products and services through people, processes, and the environment.  Development and presentation of original scholarly and creative design work under various sustainability frameworks."Application of concepts and theories from the social sciences to the study of consumer behavior. Experience in conducting research; manuscript writing."Evaluation of textile and apparel industries in global markets considering ethical, economic, political, social, and professional implications. Sourcing strategies in a global environment.  Corporate and consumer social responsibility and sustainability.  Experience in conducting research using secondary data.""Using the case study method, students apply merchandising theory, principles, and practices to industry scenarios.  Emphasis on problem solving, creative thinking, data analysis, and data interpretation involved in business operations.  Focus on the development of leadership skills while functioning in small and large groups.""Analysis of technology and consumer trends, industry practices, and marketing strategies for e-commerce.  Evaluation and development of apparel or hospitality company websites.  Theory application to the development of multi-channel business strategies."Individually designed textile and clothing-related projects that reflect the special interests of the student.Individually designed textile and clothing-related projects that reflect the special interests of the student.Individually designed textile and clothing-related projects that reflect the special interests of the student.Individually designed textile and clothing-related projects that reflect the special interests of the student.Individually designed textile and clothing-related projects that reflect the special interests of the student.Individually designed textile and clothing-related projects that reflect the special interests of the student.Individually designed textile and clothing-related projects that reflect the special interests of the student.Individually designed textile and clothing-related projects that reflect the special interests of the student.Individually designed textile and clothing-related projects that reflect the special interests of the student.Creation of an apparel line from target market research to prototypes through the use of manual techniques and CAD technologies.  The line is to be included in a professional portfolio and pieces submitted to a juried exhibition.Discussion of scholarship and current issues. Topics vary."Analysis and application of design theory and creative processes, including strategies for solving aesthetic, functional, and/or technology-focused design problems. Creation and dissemination of design scholarship.""Analysis of social science theories and concepts applicable to appearance research. Emphasis on qualitative research and philosophy of knowledge, including postmodern, symbolic interaction, semiotic, and feminist theories.  Collection and analysis of qualitative data.""Review of current merchandising theory, research, and methodology.  Emphasis on the evaluation and discussion of current and seminal merchandising literature, understanding research processes, interpretation of findings, assessing implications of research for future directions in merchandising, and the development and presentation of original scholarly work.""Beginning level development of reading, writing, listening comprehension, and speaking in Arabic, within the context of Arabic culture.  Attention to the use of the Arabic alphabet.""Continuation of ARABC 101. Beginning level development of reading, writing, listening comprehension, and speaking in Arabic, within the context of Arabic culture.""Supervised instruction in Arabic language and culture, formal class instruction at level appropriate to student's training, augmented by practical living experience. Taught in Arabic.""Intermediate level development of reading, writing, listening comprehension, and speaking in Arabic, within the context of Arabic culture.""Intermediate development of reading, writing, listening comprehension, and speaking skills in Modern Standard Arabic within the context of the Arabic world.""Supervised instruction in Arabic language and culture, formal class instruction at level appropriate to student's training, augmented by practical living experience. Taught in Arabic.""Introduction to architectural design. Introduction to architectural design, including precedent research, drawing conventions, model making, and diagramming. Studio projects focus on investigating the impact of specific site conditions on design, threshold conditions, and small-scale domestic space. Students will learn skills in problem solving, visualization, and written, oral, and graphic communication. Field trips to relevant architectural sites.""Introduction to architectural design. Introduction to architectural design, including precedent research, drawing conventions, model making, and diagramming. Studio projects focus on investigating the impact of specific site conditions on design, threshold conditions, and small-scale domestic space. Students will learn skills in problem solving, visualization, and written, oral, and graphic communication. Field trips to relevant architectural sites.""Continuation of fundamental architectural design exploration. Studio projects focus on the generation of ideas based on experience and an understanding of urban spaces. Emphasis on systematic analysis of urban culture, scale, materiality, and networks. Students work in groups and individually. Representational methods expand on architectural conventions through experimentation. Fieldtrips to relevant architectural sites.""Continuation of fundamental architectural design exploration. Studio projects focus on the generation of ideas based on experience and an understanding of urban spaces. Emphasis on systematic analysis of urban culture, scale, materiality, and networks. Students work in groups and individually. Representational methods expand on architectural conventions through experimentation. Fieldtrips to relevant architectural sites.""Survey of western architectural ideas and practices in their social, cultural, and representational contexts. Comparisons with global examples. Ancient through 1750.""Survey of western architectural ideas and practices in their social, cultural and representational contexts. Comparisons with global examples. 1750 to present.""Investigations of various design media--including computer graphics and freehand drawing--and their applications to design, specifically to the course work in ARCH 201. Exercises to develop manual skill and perceptual sensitivity.""Integrated architectural technology fundamentals in three modules: environmental, material, and structural technologies.  Introductory topics include: sustainable considerations in environmental forces and systems, (solar orientation, climate, daylight, ventilation, human comfort & occupancy patterns), basic materials and assemblies (physical properties & building codes) and structural concepts (forces, equilibrium, and stability).""Consideration of landscape as a constructed, cultural artifact. Projects address the perceptual aspects and strategies of situation and location; examination of environmental phenomena and patterns of use and settlement as revealed and affected by the architectural artifact. Development of a critical design process is stressed.""Consideration of landscape as a constructed, cultural artifact. Projects address the perceptual aspects and strategies of situation and location; examination of environmental phenomena and patterns of use and settlement as revealed and affected by the architectural artifact. Development of a critical design process is stressed.""Continuation of ARCH 301, examining housing in the urban situation; diverse scales of use and occupation within the city as shaped by cultural tendencies. Projects examine collective and individual identities related by the condition of adjacency, the ability to consider varieties of scale within a project, and a further development of critical and technical methods.""Continuation of ARCH 301, examining housing in the urban situation; diverse scales of use and occupation within the city as shaped by cultural tendencies. Projects examine collective and individual identities related by the condition of adjacency, the ability to consider varieties of scale within a project, and a further development of critical and technical methods.""Study of the development of the built environment and urban condition in the United States from the colonial period to today. Through the theme of infrastructure, primary attention is given to urban spatial organization, built form, technological change, regulatory and funding patterns, and social categories such as class, race, and gender.""Survey of theories impacting the production of architecture, historically and in contemporary practice.  Emphasis will be given to recent movements and architectural manifestations, as well as close examinations of socio-cultural conditions. Weekly readings and an analytic term paper (3000 words minimum) are required."Current and potential applications of digital computers in architecture. Projects employing computer graphics and modeling methods. Awareness of programming languages related to applications."This course deals with three dimensional problems in visual invention, organization, and expression emphasizing creative manipulation of tools, materials, and techniques as means for three dimensional thinking. Projects cover the additive (modeling), subtractive (carving), substitutional (casting) as well as constructive techniques.""Continued exploration of integrated architectural technology fundamentals in three modules: environmental, material, and structural technologies.  Topics include environmental systems (building envelope systems and heat transfer, passive heating and cooling, daylighting, thermal comfort, analytical guidelines and calculation methods), materials & assemblies (composite building materials and framing systems) and structural systems (exploration relationship between applied forces and structural forms).""In-depth explorations of integrated architectural technology fundamental topics in three modules:  environmental, material, and structural technologies with a focus on sustainable concepts and formal/material explorations.  Examination of a design process that incorporates climate into the control of thermal, luminous, and acoustic environments.  Introduction to plumbing systems.  Complex construction assemblies and large-scale construction will be studied.  Structural components (beams, columns, & slabs) will be designed, computed, and analyzed.""In-depth explorations of fundamental integrated architectural technology topics in three modules: environmental, material, and structural technologies with a focus on sustainable concepts and formal/material explorations.  An overview of active environmental control systems in response to occupant comfort, patterns of use, health, and safety regulations.  Use and design of mechanical, electrical, plumbing, fire safety, transportation, and conveying systems and subsystems.  Structural module investigates complex structural systems and behaviors with a focus on documentation and integration with other building technologies.""Architectural design, design evaluation and technical analysis using energy performance modeling tools.  Emphasis will be given to whole building energy efficiency including passive and active systems integration."Exploration of theories that describe social structure and order and the manner in which individuals and societies organize themselves and structure their environment."A rigorous examination of how buildings participate sustainably in socio-political and environmental systems.  Student projects consider in a comprehensive proposal how issues of physical site, socio-economic context, programming, structure, form, materiality, and building systems are interconnected through the design process and within the built environment.  Projects typically focus on a smaller scale urban public building that is closely connected to its physical, environmental, and social context.""A rigorous examination of how buildings participate sustainably in socio-political and environmental systems.  Student projects consider in a comprehensive proposal how issues of physical site, socio-economic context, programming, structure, form, materiality, and building systems are interconnected through the design process and within the built environment.  Projects typically focus on a smaller scale urban public building that is closely connected to its physical, environmental, and social context."An examination of the relationship between architecture and the city. Studio projects stress analysis and interpretation of the diverse forces and conditions that impact and inform architecture in the urban environment. Urban design project. Study abroad option.An examination of the relationship between architecture and the city. Studio projects stress analysis and interpretation of the diverse forces and conditions that impact and inform architecture in the urban environment. Urban design project. Study abroad option."A rigorous examination of architecture's relationship with culture and technology.  Studio projects stress the interpretation and integration of contextual and historical considerations, as well as structural, environmental, and communication systems, in a comprehensive design proposal.""A rigorous examination of architecture's relationship with culture and technology. Studio projects stress the interpretation and integration of contextual and historical considerations, as well as structural, environmental, and communication systems, in a comprehensive design proposal.""Advanced forum for architectural research and/or design. Choice of thematic studios or student initiated research and design. Experimentation and innovation are encouraged. DSN S 446 or DSN S 546, for 6 cr. each time taken, can be substituted for this class and be taken up to a maximum of 12 credits.""Advanced forum for architectural research and/or design. Choice of thematic studios or student initiated research and design. Experimentation and innovation are encouraged. DSN S 446 or DSN S 546, for 6 cr. each time taken, can be substituted for this class and be taken up to a maximum of 12 credits.""History, theory, and principles of American architecture and urban design considering relationships to the culture, visual arts, site, and surroundings. Credit counts toward fulfillment of History, Theory, Culture requirements.   A maximum of 6 credits of ARCH 420 may be applied to degree program.""History, theory, and principles of medieval architecture and urban design considering relationships to the culture, visual arts, site, and surroundings. Credit counts toward fulfillment of History, Theory, Culture requirements.   A maximum of 6 credits of ARCH 422 may be applied to degree program.""History, theory, and principles of renaissance to mid-eighteenth century architecture and urban design considering relationships to the culture, visual arts, site, and surroundings. Credit counts toward fulfillment of History, Theory, Culture requirements.   A maximum of 6 credits of ARCH 423 may be applied to degree program.""History, theory, and principles of nineteenth century architecture and urban design considering relationships to the culture, visual arts, site, and surroundings. Credit counts toward fulfillment History, Theory, Culture requirements.   A maximum of 6 credits of ARCH 424 may be applied to degree program.""History, theory, and principles of twentieth century architecture and urban design considering relationships to the culture, visual arts, site, and surroundings. Credit counts toward fulfillment History, Theory, Culture requirements.   A maximum of 6 credits of ARCH 425 may be applied to degree program.""History, theory, and principles of Native American/American Indian architecture, landscape architecture and planning considering relationships to the culture, visual arts, site, and surroundings. Credit counts toward fulfillment History, Theory, Culture.   A maximum of 6 credits of ARCH 426 may be applied to degree program.""The history and theoretical concept of Chinese built environment with emphasis on the morphology of built form and its relationship to art, landscape design, and urban structure. Credit counts toward fulfillment History, Theory, Culture.""History, theory and principles of Italian architecture and urban design considering relationships to the culture, visual arts, site, and surroundings.""Exploration of 2- and 3-dimensional representations. Emphasis on on-site freehand sketching, perspective and orthographic drawing, rendering of shadows and textures, and use of diverse media."Exploration of the computer as a design and communication tool. Emphasis on lighting and rendering techniques."Exploration of the computer as a design and manufacturing tool. Emphasis on fabrication techniques and rapid prototyping including laser-cutting, 3-D printing and CNC routing.""Emphasis on application of the computer as a design tool, topical applications and computer graphic methods, development of computer software for architectural and environmental problem solving."Special topics in design media applications.Emphasis on use of the camera and lighting in photographing drawings and interior and exterior building environments."Technical topics which ground architectural design decisions and concepts in the physical world and the human perception thereof and have environmental sustainability as an emphasis. Synthesis of material, environmental, structural and systems design and related design modeling and simulation.""Emphasis on the circumstances and opportunities of the professional practice of architecture: practice as profession, process, organization, business, and evolving models of practice."An investigation of the history of Italian design in its contemporary form as part of International study abroad program in Rome.Independent investigation.Independent investigation.Independent investigation.Independent investigation.Independent investigation.Independent investigation.Independent investigation.Independent investigation."An introduction to comprehensive architectural design projects that focuses on three interrelated design skills: mapping, programming and building. Projects establish a framework for designing buildings that considers multiple factors such as environmental forces, construction methods, building codes, urban regulations, social relationships, and cultural values.""Small-scale architectural design projects that investigate design representation through analogue and digital means.  The projects explore different representation strategies to help students develop an understanding of the particular modes of architectural representation that advance the designer's knowledge of space as a complex interaction between materials with inherent physical characteristics, mobile socializing bodies, and changing environmental cycles.""Design projects that emphasize the multi-faceted role of the architectural detail in the design process through first, understanding the historical specificity of building construction and detailing; second, utilizing working drawing as a mode of communication; and third, designing with details. The term-long project will consider a set of working drawings of past buildings as a site for design intervention.""History, theory, and principles of construction from ancient times through today.  Analytic project or term paper and weekly readings with discussion questions."Introduction to basic academic writings on Middle Eastern cities in addition to other contemporary cultural productions of the region. Study of various aspects of Middle Eastern life and the built environments that this life produces."Seminar on critical analysis of meaning and form in architecture and human-made environment in various cultural contexts examined from historical and theoretical perspectives.  Analytic term paper and weekly readings with discussion questions. Credit counts toward fulfillment of History, Theory, Culture requirements Meets International Perspectives Requirement.""The history and theoretical concept of Chinese built environment with emphasis on the morphology of built form and its relationship to art, landscape design, and urban structure. Credit counts toward fulfillment History, Theory, Culture."n/a.n/a.n/a."The American Midwest has witnessed dramatic transformation during the last two centuries which impacted its physical, environmental, economic and social characteristics. This course is an interdisciplinary study of the evolution and sustainability of Midwestern space in relationship to forces of flow shaped by the mobility of bodies, products, meanings, and symbols that are enforced, incorporated, reproduced or destroyed.""Emphasis on concepts, algorithms, data structures, advanced modeling, rendering, animation, and virtual reality applications in architectural design."Advanced investigation of sculptural expression with emphasis on individual projects."Introduction to Human Factors, Descriptive Geometry, Basic Building Materials, and Small-Scale Building Envelopes. Theory and case studies, stressing the connectivity of technical issues to broader formal, social, and cultural spheres.""Elementary Statics and Beam Theory, Basic Construction Materials, and Site and Building Circulation. Theory and case studies stressing the connectivity of technical issues to broader formal, social, and cultural spheres.""Issues of Sustainability as related to living patterns and city design, population, pollution and use and availability of natural resources for the built environment; Issues of Green Architecture as it relates to building material selection, systems of building materials, the environment of the United States and the World, architects and examples of buildings with green or sustainable designations.""Construction standards and procedures for preserving, restoring, reconstructing, and rehabilitating existing buildings following the guidelines of the National Park Service and the National Trust for Historic Preservation. Credit counts toward fulfillment of History, Theory, Culture requirements.""Principles and procedures of universal design in response to the varying ability level of users. Assessment and analysis of existing buildings and sites with respect to standards and details of accessibility for all people, including visually impaired, mentally impaired, and mobility restricted users. Design is neither a prerequisite nor a required part of the course. Enrollment open to students majoring in related disciplines. Credit counts toward fulfillment of History, Theory, Culture requirements.""Current urban design theory and its application to urban problems. Credit counts toward fulfillment of History, Theory, Culture requirements.""Special topics in environmental design, architectural history and contemporary practice. Travel to relevant countries. General cultural and historical studies, topical projects and individual inquiry. Courses may be taught by departmental faculty or faculty from approved Iowa State Study Abroad programs. See current offerings for detailed syllabus."Planning and execution of a project serving a community need.  Learning occurs through both theory and active involvement in on-site work. Projects connect previous coursework to practical applications and community involvement."Emphasis on the circumstances and opportunities of the professional practice of architecture: practice as profession, process, organization, business, and evolving models of practice.""Foundational course in the methods and conceptual tools of design research in the context of practice. Through team and individual guided projects, students generate, analyze and represent knowledge in design-related communications and contexts. Alternative models of practice, client groups and communities are addressed within projects that precede, feed, follow, or overlap with architectural contracts."Investigation of architectural issues having a specialized nature."Introduction to historical canons and traditions of architecture and urbanism. Discussion of the relationship between historical inquiry and contemporary practice. Students learn skills in critical thinking, visual analysis, and research methods. Course sessions develop thematically with interdisciplinary readings, group discussions, student presentations, and research projects.""Introduction to landscape as artifact and multi-disciplinary knowledge-base for design thinking. Literatures and methods of environmental psychology, cultural geography, landscape and architectural history and theory, site and circulation design as intersection of built infrastructural, natural, and social systems. Emphasis on sensory perception, and human movement;  investigations of climate, environmental conditions, and values toward consumption and sustainability in everyday experience of the built environment."Multidisciplinary overview of contemporary theories concerned with the production of the built environment. Particular attention to urbanism as a discourse that relates social interactions and power structures to material space."A research seminar which considers a topic within contemporary discourses on the built environment outside of Europe and North America. The topic will be studied from multiple perspectives highlighting the historical and theoretical relationships between architecture, global cultures, geography, landscape, and urban planning. Credit counts toward fulfillment History, Theory, Culture requirements.""Design projects that are developed through integrative design strategies that explore the relationship between buildings and environmental forces to maximize non-wasteful, efficient use of resources such as energy, water and building materials. Projects will include investigations of the impact of solar energy, airflow, building materials, passive and active systems and wall sections on spatial quality and form making. Design decisions will be quantitatively validated through energy modeling and performance simulation.""Design projects that explore the relationships between architectural, cultural, and environmental landscapes. Emphasis on regional sites, socio-economic conditions, and sustainable design and planning practices at multiple scales. Projects stress engagement with local circumstances and stakeholders; systemic interconnections and strategies; and the application of interdisciplinary research.""Rigorous examination of architecture's relationship with culture and technology. Studio projects stress the interpretation of contextual and historical considerations, as well as structural, environmental, mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems, in a comprehensive design proposal. This course fulfills the Graduate College Creative Component Requirement.""Design studio selected by the students, which may include but is not limited to: independent design study, interdisciplinary design studio, study abroad, and design build. DSN S 546 for 6 cr. may be substituted for this course.""Third in a four-course series in building science and technologies. Structural Elements and Systems, and Building Services. Theory and case studies stressing the connectivity of technical issues to broader formal, social and cultural spheres.""Fourth of a four-course series in building science and technologies. Building Enclosures, Interior Construction and Sensory Qualities, Fabrication and Construction. Theory and case studies stressing the connectivity of technical issues to broader formal, social and cultural spheres. Summative Student Project."Independent architectural design projects commensurate with student interests requiring approval of Architecture Graduate  Committee.Special topics and guest speakers.Research."Methods of teaching in and through visual art are experienced and applied in this course. Art-centered and interdisciplinary art education methods for K-8 teaching are designed to develop creativity, authentic expression, collaboration, aesthetic sensitivity and pluralistic, global perspectives.""Teaching methods for K-12 art education. Hands-on discipline-specific and integrated art activities are experienced and designed; emphasis is on creativity, artistic and human diversity, and thinking skills development in holistic, pluralistic art education.""Development of the visual arts including painting, sculpture, architecture, and crafts, from the prehistoric through Gothic period.""Development of the visual arts of western civilization including painting, sculpture, architecture, and crafts; from the Renaissance to the twentieth century.""Development of the visual arts of western civilization including painting, sculpture, architecture, and crafts; from the Renaissance to the twentieth century.""An introduction to various topics in visual culture studies.  The lecture course will provide students with a creative and intellectual context in which to study historical and contemporary instances of the visual in culture.  Individual lectures examine significant trends in the visual arts, mass media, scientific imagery, visual communications, and other areas related to visual literacy and visual representation in local and global contexts.  Cross cultural viewpoints and issues of diversity will be presented in relation to visual culture and related fields.""History of designed artifacts, their creators, and their cultural environments in Western Europe and America from the beginning of the Industrial Revolution to the present.""Survey of Italian art and architecture from the Etruscans to Bernini, including lectures and tours of museums and historical sites. Study abroad course taught in Rome, with travel to other Italian cities.""Introduction to the history of art and architecture in Asia before the modern era. Cultures may include China, Korea, Japan, and India.  Visual materials selected based on important themes that are critical in understanding Asian culture and art tradition."Greek art from Neolithic to Hellenistic periods. Roman art from the traditional founding to the end of the empire in the West.Greek art from Neolithic to Hellenistic periods. Roman art from the traditional founding to the end of the empire in the West."Historical survey of the painting, sculpture, crafts, and architecture of the various civilizations of the Islamic world.""Historical survey of the painting, sculpture, crafts, and architecture of the various civilizations of the Islamic world.""European art including painting, sculpture, architecture, and crafts; thirteenth through sixteenth centuries.""European art including painting, sculpture, architecture, and crafts; thirteenth through sixteenth centuries.""Survey of American art from the early colonial period to 1945, with emphasis on historical and cultural issues that underlie art production in the United States.""Visual arts and critical theory of the early 20th century, including Expressionism, Cubism, Futurism, Suprematism, Dada, and Surrealism.""Visual arts and critical theory after 1945, including Abstract Expressionism, Pop Art, and Performance Art.""Survey of the evolution of photography and photojournalism from the 1830s to the present, seen from an art historical perspective, emphasizing causative factors, cultural influences,and major masters and schools.""Survey of Indian-style art and architecture through history.  Examination of how art and architecture developed in the Indian world has come to define the Indian identity religiously, culturally, socially, and politically.""Study and tours of museums, galleries, artist and/or designer studios and other areas of interest within art history.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""European and American art and architecture from 1780 to 1900 focusing on the major movements of western Europe, including: Neo-Classicism, Romanticism, Realism, Impressionism, and Post-Impressionism.""An art-historical survey of comic strips, comic books, and graphic novels from their origins in the 19th century to present.""An art-historical survey of comic strips, comic books, and graphic novels from their origins in the 19th century to present."Student must have completed art history coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed art history coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Cultural and historical aspects of art and design in Western Europe in preparation for study abroad. Area of study varies each time offered. Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."International study abroad program in western Europe. Visits to design studios, art museums, and educational facilities. Related activities depending on specific area of study which may vary each time offered."Issues of gender related to cultural environments from the Middle Ages to contemporary times in Europe and America. Feminist movement beginning in the 1970s and specifically gender issues in art that are becoming widespread in the artistic culture.Written approval of supervising instructor on required form in advance of semester of enrollment. Supervised experience with a cooperating museum or gallery or art center.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Specialized study in the history or criticism of art and/or design."Issues and debates that pertain to the study of visual objects and material artifacts in their cultural context. Examination of the role of visual and material culture studies as both relate to allied disciplines including, but not limited to: anthropology, art history, design history, design studies, and new media studies.""Survey of Indian art and architecture through history.  Examination of how art and architecture developed in the Indian world has come to define the Indian identity religiously, culturally, socially, and politically."Supervised experience with a cooperating museum or gallery or art center.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."European and American art and architecture from 1780 to 1900, focusing on the major movements of western Europe including: Neo-Classicism, Romanticism, Realism, Impressionism, and Post-Impressionism.""Visual arts and critical theory of the early 20th century, including: Expressionism, Cubism, Futurism, Suprematism, Dada and Surrealism.""An art-historical survey of comic strips, comic books, and graphic novels from their origins in the 19th century to present."Special Topics for Art History.Independent Study in Art History."International study abroad program in western Europe. Visits to design studios, art museums, and educational facilities. Related activities depending on specific area of study which may vary each time offered."Issues of gender related to cultural environments from the Middle Ages to contemporary times in Europe and America.  Feminist movement beginning in the 1970s and specifically gender issues in art that are becoming widespread in the artistic culture."Visual arts and critical theory after 1945, including Abstract Expressionism, Pop Art, and Performance Art.""Survey of the evolution of photography and photojournalism from the 1830s to the present, seen from an art historical perspective, emphasizing causative factors, cultural influences, and major masters and schools.""Seminar covering aspects of art and design based on ecological principles, including earthworks, land-based art, recycled/reused objects, ecofeminism, ephemerality, and green design."Specialized study in the history or criticism of art and/or design."An entirely web-based course covering topics in observing the sky and navigation by the stars for students with little or no previous experience. The course combines material on common naked-eye phenomena, such as daily and seasonal variations in the sky, with information on how these helped navigators determine where they are on Earth. The course ""lectures"" are on-line, interactive units with build in exercises, hands-on (offline) activities and layers of help. Graded homework and quizzes are administered via Blackboard Learn.   Students who take Astro 120 may count credit in only one of Astro 102 or 103 toward graduation.""An entirely web-based course covering topics in celestial mechanics (""Rocket science!"") for students with little or no previous experience. It combines the geography of the solar system with discussion of methods of traveling to the other planets. The course ""lectures"" are on-line, interactive units with built-in exercises, hands-on (offline) activities, and layers of help. Graded homework and quizzes are administered via Blackboard Learn.   Students who take Astro 120 may count credit in only one of Astro 102 or 103 toward graduation.""Fundamental concepts of Earth and Space Science, including the solar system, weather and climate, water and soils, plate tectonics, and geologic hazards. Online course format.""Inquiry-based lab exploring fundamental concepts of Earth and Space Science, including the solar system, weather and climate, water and soils, plate tectonics, and geologic hazards. Must be taken concurrently with GEOL/ASTRO 106.""For the nonscientist. A survey of our view of the universe, and the exploration of the solar system and beyond.  The sky: constellations; motions of the Sun, Moon, and planets; seasons and the calendar; eclipses. The solar system: origin and evolution; characteristics of the Sun, planets, satellites, comets, meteorites, and asteroids. The detection and characterization of other solar systems, and the search for life in the universe.  Extensive use of the planetarium is included.   Students who take Astro 120 may count credit in only one of Astro 102 or 103 toward graduation."Laboratory course to accompany ASTRO 120. Students carry out practical exercises involving naked eye and telescopic observing to explore and reinforce ideas covered in ASTRO 120. Activities based on a sky-simulation computer program and other weather-independent exercises are also included."For the nonscientist. A survey of astronomy with a focus on the universe beyond our solar system.  Basic observational astronomy and the history of astronomy.  Stellar astronomy: motions, distances, sizes, spectra; types of stars; variability; binary systems. Stellar evolution: the birth, life, and death of stars, including supernovae, neutron stars, and black holes. The structure and evolution of the Milky Way Galaxy.  Other galaxies, clusters of galaxies, quasars. Theories of the origin of the universe.""For the nonscientist. A small enrollment course examining new and exciting topics in modern astronomy. Galaxy and star formation. Black holes and pulsars. Colliding galaxies. Quasars. Dark Matter.  Dark energy.  Quasars. Cosmology, the Big Bang and the future of the universe. Prospects and searches for extraterrestrial life.""An introduction to the physics of the Solar System and the planetary systems discovered around other stars.  General characteristics of planetary systems: dynamics, thermodynamics, internal and surface structure of planets and minor bodies, physics of their atmosphere.  Discovery techniques and characterization of extrasolar planets, and planetary systems formation models.  ""Grand tour"" of the Solar System, using data and imagery from probes and telescopes that have visited these worlds.  The origin and evolution of life on Earth, and the ongoing search for life in the Solar System and elsewhere in the universe.""Experiments in optical astronomy. Observational techniques, ranging from stellar photometry to CCD imaging. Data processing and analysis techniques.  Astronomical software packages and online databases and resources.  Available instruments include a variety of small telescopes and astronomical CCD cameras.""An exploration of the universe beyond our Solar System, with emphasis on the astrophysics of stars and galaxies. Observable properties of stars, physics of stellar atmospheres and interiors. Birth, evolution and death of stars, to understand the past and future of our Sun, the Milky Way galaxy and the other galaxies in the universe. Basic concepts of cosmology, dark matter and dark energy. Use of computer models to calculate the structure and evolution of stars and protostars, and to analyze actual astronomical data obtained by professional astronomers.""Introduction to modern cosmology and large-scale structure; mathematical and observational fundamentals associated with the origin, structure, and evolution of the Universe.  Scale of the Universe, Hubble's Law, the cosmic microwave background, Big Bang nucleosynthesis, the origin of elements, dark energy and the accelerating universe, and dark matter. For senior undergraduates and graduate students in all areas of physics."Research under supervision of astronomy faculty.Laboratory or observational project under supervision of astronomy faculty.No more than 9 credits of Astro 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of Astro 490 may be counted toward graduation."Introduction to modern cosmology and large-scale structure; mathematical and observational fundamentals associated with the origin, structure, and evolution of the Universe.  Scale of the Universe, Hubble's Law, the cosmic microwave background, Big Bang nucleosynthesis, the origin of elements, dark energy and the accelerating universe, and dark matter. For senior undergraduates and graduate students in all areas of physics.""Techniques in optical and near-IR astronomy, including spectroscopy and CCD photometry. Emphasis on projects involving proficiency in the use of research telescopes and modern instrumentation. Project topics range from photometric studies of pulsating and binary star systems to deep CCD imaging of faint nebulae and galaxies.""The interior structure and atmospheric properties of stars:  Stellar structure equations and constitutive relations: energy generation, energy transport by radiation and convection; equation of state, nuclear energy generation and nucleosynthesis. Numerical and analytic solutions to the equations of structure and evolution. Observational connections through the theory of radiative transfer.  Line and continuum processes and sources of opacity.  Non-LTE and statistical equilibrium.  Line profiles.  Interpretation of stellar spectra:  temperature, pressure, and abundance determinations.  Stellar evolution from formation to final phases.""Interactions of high-energy particles, non-thermal radiation processes, spectral evolution of non-thermal systems, cosmic rays, active galactic nuclei, pulsars, neutrinos, measurement techniques for relativistic charged particles, high energy photons, and neutrinos.""Overall structure of our Galaxy and the interstellar medium.  Physical processes in the interstellar medium (e.g., heating and cooling mechanisms, turbulence).  Observational techniques for studying the interstellar medium.  Kinematics and chemical evolution of the Galaxy.""Galaxy evolution, dynamics of external galaxies, evolution and classification of galaxies, groups and clusters of galaxies, extragalactic radio sources, quasars, structure formation, cosmological models and their observational consequences."Individually directed study of research-level problems for students electing the nonthesis M.S. option in astronomy.Topics of current interest in astronomy and astrophysics.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Advanced topics in stellar astrophysics. Dynamic and extended atmospheres, chromospheres, coronae, and stellar winds.  MHD, stellar activity, and dynamo theory. Radiative transfer and the transition from extended atmospheres to the interstellar medium. Diffusive processes in stellar atmospheres and interiors. Techniques for quantitative analysis of planetary and stellar spectra including detailed modeling and spectrum synthesis.  Evolution in interacting binaries. Nucleosynthesis II.  Variable stars. Supernovae. Neutron stars and black holes."Pre-athletic training clinical experience designed to orientate students to the athletic training profession prior to enrolling in athletic training course sequence.  Students will observe athletic trainers in various athletic training clinical sites.  Open to pre-athletic training students only.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Athletic training clinical experiences designed to review human anatomical structures including origin, insertion, action, innervations of muscles.  Students will gain experience with palpation of these structures to help identify location of anatomical landmarks.  Students will also gain experience identifying bones, ligaments, and tendons.  Open to athletic training students only.""Introduction to methods of prevention and immediate care of athletic injuries. Basic information concerning health supervision of athletes, and some basic wrapping and strapping techniques for common injuries. Non A TR majors only.""Athletic training clinical observation experiences to accompany A TR 222. Utilize knowledge to evaluate, analyze and demonstrate appropriate taping, wrapping and basic skill techniques. Open to students interested in the athletic training option.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Provides pre-athletic training students with the knowledge of the profession of a certified athletic trainer, factors associated with injury prevention, treatment, emergency care of athletic injuries, protective equipment, basic organization, administrative, and legal concepts in the athletic training setting. To be taken concurrently with A TR 221.""Athletic training clinical experiences for athletic training students during pre-season intercollegiate football. Clinical experiences include:  Professional Rescuer CPR, AED certification, emergency splinting and spineboarding, medical record keeping and HIPPA regulations, environmental conditions, prevention of injury screening strategies, athletic training room and education program policies and procedures, review of athletic taping techniques, acute injury management, mouthpiece formation, and anatomy review.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Sport injury assessment procedures and evaluation techniques for lower body injuries. Includes an overview of mechanisms of injury, general musculoskeletal disorders, and spine or neurological dysfunction. Designed for students in the athletic training major."Athletic training clinical experience to accompany A TR 224. Open to students in the athletic training major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Sport injury assessment procedures and evaluation techniques for lower body injuries. Includes an overview of common illnesses of athletes and sport specific injuries. Designed for students in the athletic training major.Athletic training clinical experience to accompany A TR 226. Open to students in the athletic training major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Basic information and laboratory instruction regarding basic taping techniques, athletic equipment fitting procedures, and the use and proper fitting of prophylactic braces. Open to students in the athletic training major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Theory and technique of therapeutic modalities used in the management of injuries.Athletic training clinical experience to accompany A TR 323. Open to students in athletic training major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Theory and practical application of rehabilitation principles used in the management of athletic injuries.Athletic training clinical experience to accompany A TR 326. Open to students in the athletic training major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Current administrative, professional, and legal issues pertaining to athletic training. Job search techniques and strategies including preparation of materials for athletic training students.""Current medical issues and concerns, including pathology of illness and injury, dermatological conditions, exposure to allied health care professionals, and pharmacological indications in relation to the profession of athletic training and in patient/athlete care."Clinical experiences in application of athletic training techniques under supervision of certified athletic trainers. Participation in monthly research journal discussion.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Preparation for professional endorsement and certification by review of required competencies and clinical proficiencies. Required for endorsement or approval to sit for Board of Certification Exam.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport.Limited to 1 credit per year to a maximum of 4.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for a sport section of Ath 101 may not be applied toward graduation if credit is also received for KIN 166 or any skill technique course in the same sport."Research activities, career opportunities in biochemistry and biophysics, and an introduction to the structure of biologically important compounds. For students majoring in biochemistry, agricultural biochemistry or biophysics or considering one of these majors.""Topics in the scientific background of biochemistry, such as macromolecules, metabolism, and catalysis. Laboratory experimentation covers biochemical concepts and the study of bio-molecules including proteins, lipids and nucleic acids. A significant component is practice in scientific communication. For students majoring in biochemistry, agricultural biochemistry or biophysics or considering one of these majors.""Survey of chemical principles as they apply in biological systems including: water, organic chemistry of functional groups in biomolecules and biochemical cofactors, weak bonds and their contribution to biomolecular structure, oxidation-reduction reactions and redox potential, thermodynamic laws and bioenergetics, chemical equilibria and kinetics, inorganic chemistry in biological systems, data presentation.  The subjects will be taught using molecules from biological systems as examples.  Intended for majors in biochemistry, biophysics or agricultural biochemistry.""Fundamentals necessary for an understanding of biochemical processes. Primarily for students in agriculture.   Not acceptable for credit toward a major in biochemistry, biophysics, or agricultural biochemistry. Credit for both BBMB 221 and Chem 231 may not be applied toward graduation.""A survey of biochemistry: structure and function of amino acids, proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids; enzymology; metabolism; biosynthesis; and selected topics.   Not acceptable for credit toward a major in biochemistry, biophysics, or agricultural biochemistry.""Understanding biological systems at the molecular level; chemistry of biological macromolecules, enzyme function and regulation, metabolic pathways; integration of metabolism in diverse living systems. For students in biology and related majors who do not require the more rigorous treatment of biochemistry found in BBMB 404/405.   Not acceptable for credit toward a major in biochemistry, biophysics, or agricultural biochemistry.""A general overview for graduate and advanced undergraduate students in agricultural, biological, chemical and nutritional sciences. Chemistry of amino acids, proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids, vitamins; protein structure; enzymology; carbohydrate metabolism.   Credit for both BBMB 420 and the BBMB 404 - 405 sequence may not be applied toward graduation.""A general overview for graduate and advanced undergraduate students in agricultural, biological, chemical, and nutritional sciences. Metabolism of carbohydrates, amino acids, nucleotides and lipids; formation, turnover, and molecular relationships among DNA, RNA, and proteins; genetic code; regulation of gene expression; selected topics in the molecular physiology of plants and animals.   Credit for both BBMB 420 and the BBMB 404 - BBMB 405 sequence may not be applied toward graduation.""Laboratory experimentation and techniques for studying biochemistry, including: chromatographic methods; electrophoresis; spectrophotometry; enzyme purification; enzyme kinetics; and characterization of carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. Scientific communication and technical writing are emphasized.""Structure and function of proteins; enzymology; biological oxidation; chemistry and metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids and nucleic acids; protein synthesis and the genetic code; relationship of biochemistry to selected animal diseases. Biochemistry of higher animals emphasized.   Not acceptable for credit toward a major in agricultural biochemistry or biochemistry. Acceptable for credit toward a major in biophysics. Credit for both BBMB 420 and the BBMB 404 - 405 sequence may not be applied toward graduation.""Survey of the diverse groups of procaryotes emphasizing important and distinguishing metabolic, phylogenetic, morphological, and ecological features of members of those groups.""Fundamental techniques and theory for studying the cellular mechanisms and diversity of microbial life. Experimental   techniques will include isolation and physiological characterization of bacteria that inhabit different environments. Also included are   techniques for phylogenetic characterization, measuring gene expression, and genetic manipulation of diverse species of bacteria. Essential components for the effective communication of scientific results are also emphasized.""Physical methods for the study of molecular structure and organization of biological materials.  X-ray diffraction, nuclear magnetic resonance, hydrodynamics and fluorescence spectroscopy.  Registration for the graduate credit commits the student to graduate-level examinations, which differ from undergraduate-level examinations in the number and/or difficulty of questions."Independent study with a faculty mentor.   No more than 9 credits of BBMB 490 may count toward graduation.Independent study with a faculty mentor.   No more than 9 credits of BBMB 490 may count toward graduation.Independent research under faculty guidance."Review of amino acids and proteins, including atomic interactions, thermodynamics, structure and properties of amino acids, post-translational modifications, protein expression, purification and analysis, protein secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure, protein folding, oxygen transport and hemoglobin, models for equilibrium binding, elementary reactions and enzyme kinetics, biosynthesis of amino acids: pathways and mechanisms.""Examination of catabolic pathways involved in the oxidation of organic and inorganic molecules, and energy metabolism involving inputs from light or other non-light sources. Central metabolism and glycolysis, fermentation, aerobic and anaerobic respiration, photosynthesis.""Analysis of the structure, function, and synthesis of membranes. Bacterial and eukaryotic membrane characteristics. Membrane transport and signaling mechanisms. Analysis of the structure and function of lipids and membrane proteins.""Analysis of the chemical structure, function, synthesis, and metabolism of nucleic acids. Chemical characterization of nucleotides, polynucleotides, DNA, and RNA. Analysis of transcription, translation, and the genetic code.""Survey of the diverse groups of procaryotes emphasizing important and distinguishing metabolic, phylogenetic, morphological, and ecological features of members of those groups."Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Techniques. Includes: fermentation, protein isolation, protein purification, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, NMR, confocal microscopy and laser microdissection, Immunophenotyping, and monoclonal antibody production. Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Advanced solution state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy as applied to biological systems.  Topics include theoretical   principles of NMR, practical aspects of experimental NMR, methodologies for protein structure determination, NMR relaxation,   recent advances in NMR spectroscopy.""Physical methods for the study of molecular structure and organization of biological materials.  X-ray diffraction, nuclear magnetic resonance, hydrodynamics and fluorescence spectroscopy.  Registration for the graduate credit commits the student to graduate-level examinations, which differ from undergraduate-level examinations in the number and/or difficulty of questions.""Practice in methods of X-ray diffraction, nuclear magnetic resonance, hydrodynamics and fluorescence spectroscopy as applied to macromolecules.""Algorithmic and statistical approaches in structural genomics including protein, DNA and RNA structure. Structure determination, refinement, representation, comparison, visualization, and modeling. Analysis and prediction of protein secondary and tertiary structure, disorder, protein cores and surfaces, protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions, protein localization and function."By arrangement.Workshops in selected topics in biochemistry and biophysics. Credit in this course does not meet the requirement for advanced graduate electives in Biochemistry.  Spring only: BBMB Undergraduate Research Symposium  participation. Scheduled class meetings are required in addition to attending the symposium."Description of unique aspects of plant biochemistry including lipid metabolism, cell wall structure, secondary metabolism, phytoalexin biosynthesis, and plant defenses."Current topics in molecular aspects of immunology: T and B cell receptors; major histocompatibility complex; antibody structure; immunosuppressive drugs and viruses; and intracellular signaling pathways leading to expression of genes that control and activate immune function."Structure, occurrence, properties, function, and chemical and enzymatic modifications of monosaccharides, oligosaccharides, polysaccharides, and glycoproteins.""Fundamental and advanced enzyme kinetics. Topics include integrated rate equations, methods for deriving initial-rate equations, inhibition, product effects, methods for verifying kinetic mechanisms, allostery, hysteresis, isotope effects, and complex kinetic mechanisms.""The chemical basis of enzymatic catalysis with emphasis on mechanisms of substrate recognition, general acid-base catalysis and stereo-electronic factors.""Molecular mechanisms of cellular signaling including receptor activation, desensitization and cross talk, signal transduction pathways, and nuclear receptors. Discussion includes a variety of cell surface receptors and their hormone; growth factor and extracellular matrix activators; protein kinases; caspase and transcription factor downstream signals; lipids, gases and cyclic nucleotides as regulators of cell signaling. Course content includes current literature, student and instructor presentations and research proposal writing."First 8 weeks. Chemical reactions as a means of determining protein structure and biological function.Second 8 weeks. Protein structure determination as a means of understanding biological function."Protein and lipid constituents of biological membranes. Structure and topography of membrane proteins. Selected topics concerning the membrane proteins involved in diverse biochemical processes, such as energy transduction transport across membranes, neurotransmission and signal transduction.""Topics may include molecular and cellular neuroscience, neurodevelopment, neuroplasticity, neurodegenerative diseases, cognitive neuroscience, sensory biology, neural integration, membrane biophysics, neuroethology, techniques in neurobiology and behavior.""In-depth discussion of nucleic acid properties, structures and structure/function relationships. Interactions between nucleic acids and proteins will be emphasized.""Analysis of the biochemical processes involved in expression of eucaryotic genes and the regulation thereof, including RNA polymerase, transcriptional regulatory proteins, enhancers and silencers, chromosome structure, termination, RNA processing, RNA transport, RNA turnover, small RNAs, translational regulation, protein turnover."Student presentations."Faculty, staff and invited guest research seminar."Research seminars by faculty and graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Student and faculty presentations."Survey of key bioinformatics methods, including hands-on use of computational tools to solve various biological problems. Topics include: database searching, sequence alignment, gene prediction, RNA and protein structure prediction, construction of phylogenetic trees, comparative and functional genomics, and systems biology."Biology as an information science. Review of algorithms and information processing. Generative models for sequences. String algorithms. Pairwise sequence alignment. Multiple sequence alignment. Searching sequence databases. Genome sequence assembly.Advanced sequence models.  Basic methods in molecular phylogeny.  Hidden Markov models.  Genome annotation.  DNA and protein motifs. Introduction to gene expression analysis."Algorithmic and statistical approaches in structural genomics including protein, DNA and RNA structure. Structure determination, refinement, representation, comparison, visualization, and modeling. Analysis and prediction of protein secondary and tertiary structure, disorder, protein cores and surfaces, protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions, protein localization and function.""Algorithmic and statistical approaches in computational functional genomics and systems biology. Elements of experiment design. Analysis of high throughput gene expression, proteomics, and other datasets obtained using system-wide measurements. Topological analysis, module discovery, and comparative analysis of gene and protein networks. Modeling, analysis, simulation and inference of transcriptional regulatory modules and networks, protein-protein interaction networks, metabolic networks, cells and systems: Dynamic systems, Boolean, and probabilistic models. Multi-scale, multi-granularity models. Ontology-driven, network based, and probabilistic approaches to information integration.""Current topics in bioinformatics and computational biology research. Lectures by off-campus experts. Students read background literature, attend preparatory seminars, attend all lectures, meet with lecturers."Off-campus work periods for graduate students in the field of bioinformatics and computational biology."Topics of interest in the major research areas of computational molecular biology, including genomics, structural genomics, functional genomics, and computational systems biology."Student research presentations.Faculty research series.Graduate research projects performed under the supervision of selected faculty members in the Bioinformatics and Computational Biology major.First 8 weeks. Orientation to the area of bioinformatics and computational biology. For students considering a major in BCBIO.   Specializations and career opportunities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Genome sequencing, assembly, structural and functional annotation, and comparative genomics. Investigating these topics will develop skills in programming and scripting (Perl and/or Python), the use of biological databases, sequence alignment, homology search, identification of sequence patterns, construction of phylogenetic trees, and comparative genomics.""Application of computer science to molecular biology.  String algorithms, sequence alignments, indexing data structures, homology   search methods, pattern recognition, fragment assembly, genome annotation, construction of bioinformatics databases, and   gathering and distribution of biological information with the Internet.""Genomics: Gene structure prediction, gene function prediction and comparative genomics.  Post-genomics: Gene expression studies,   DNA microarrays, next-generation sequencing of transcriptome. Structural biology: Protein and RNA structure predictions, structure   representation, comparison and visualization.  Systems biology: Signal transduction pathway inference, biological networks and   systems.""Modular minicourses consisting of guided tutorials and hands-on computer software exercises focused on fundamental problems, approaches, and software applications in bioinformatics and computational biology.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Modular minicourses consisting of guided tutorials and hands-on computer software exercises focused on fundamental problems, approaches, and software applications in bioinformatics and computational biology.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Modular minicourses consisting of guided tutorials and hands-on computer software exercises focused on fundamental problems, approaches, and software applications in bioinformatics and computational biology.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Modular minicourses consisting of guided tutorials and hands-on computer software exercises focused on fundamental problems, approaches, and software applications in bioinformatics and computational biology.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Modular minicourses consisting of guided tutorials and hands-on computer software exercises focused on fundamental problems, approaches, and software applications in bioinformatics and computational biology.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Broad overview of bioinformatics with a significant problem-solving component, including hands-on practice using computational tools to solve a variety of biological problems. Topics include: bioinformatic data processing, Perl programming, genome assembly, database search, sequence alignment, gene prediction, next-generation sequencing, comparative and functional genomics, and systems biology."Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may use no more than 9 credits of BCBIO 490 and 491 toward graduation.Research projects in bioinformatics and computational biology done by teams of students.   Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may use no more than 9 credits of BCBIO 490 and 491 toward graduation."Studio basics and professional techniques in black & white, continuous tone, and color. Emphasis on tools, materials, and rendering.""Application of painting, drawing, and image making techniques to communication. Development of technical abilities using illustration software. Digital and print production techniques."Studio problems in illustration emphasizing composition and communication. Problem solving methodologies.Rendering techniques applied to different types of biological and scientific subjects emphasizing communication.  The use of traditional and digital media.  Term project required."A combination seminar and field trip course emphasizing nature interpretation, field sketching techniques and preparation of a final illustration based on field experience."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for these courses prior to commencing each work period."Sketching plants, animals and terrain. Visual communication, development of a personal style, and integration of typographic and visual elements on a page will be emphasized."Beginning to intermediate technical and compositional aspects of color photography of natural areas and their plants and animals.Intensive exploration of illustration techniques in a studio or field setting.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Life considered at cellular, organism, and population levels. Function and diversity of the living world. Presentation of basic biological principles as well as topics and issues of current human interest.  Does not satisfy biology major requirements.""Orientation to the scope of the biological sciences, and discussion of professional opportunities. Required of first year biology majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to biological science disciplines and professional opportunities through faculty presentations which examine a variety of current research topics.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Orientation to opportunities in Biology. Review of degree requirements and other information needed by students that have not participated in the first year Biology orientation courses.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."A survey course of human biology, including principal structures and functions of the body systems and the diseases and disorders associated with them. Designed to meet general education requirements in natural science. Not recommended for those seeking a career in the allied health professions or for students majoring in life science. Does not satisfy biology major requirements.""An introduction to the structure and function of natural systems at scales from the individual to the biosphere and the complex interactions between humans and their environment. Discussions of human population growth, biodiversity, sustainability, resource use, and pollution. Does not satisfy biology major requirements.""Discussion of current and emerging environmental issues such as human population growth, energy use, loss of biodiversity, water resources, and climate change.""Survey of the major groups of organisms and biological systems. Definition, measurements, and patterns of distribution of organisms. Sources of information about biodiversity. Does not satisfy biology major requirements.  Half semester course.""Introduction to the nature of life, including the diversity of microbial, plant, and animal life; the nature of heredity; evolution; and principles of ecology. Intended for life science majors."Laboratory to accompany 211."Introduction to the chemical, molecular, and cellular basis of life; form and function of microbial, plant, and animal life. Intended for life science majors."Laboratory to accompany 212.Plant and microbial processes in environmental systems including their interactions with human activities."An introduction to human anatomy, beginning with cells and tissues, surveying all body systems, relating form to function. Systems covered include: integumentary, bones and joints, muscles, nervous, sensory, endocrine, circulatory, lymphatic, respiratory, digestive, urinary, and  reproductive.  Pre-Medical students should consider BIOL 351 for their anatomy background.  Does not satisfy biology major requirements."Investigation of human anatomy using models and dissections of preserved organs and model mammals. Pre-Medical students should consider 351 for their anatomy background.  Does not satisfy biology major requirements."An introduction to human physiology, studying the function of all body systems. Systems covered  include: integumentary, bones and joints, muscles, nervous, sensory, endocrine, circulatory, lymphatic and immune, respiratory, digestive, urinary, and reproductive. Pre-Medical students should consider 335 for their physiology background.  Does not satisfy biology major requirements."Student-conducted experiments investigating concepts of human physiology with computer data acquisition and analysis.  Interpretation of experimental results and preparation of lab reports. Pre-Medical students should consider 335 for their anatomy and physiology background.  Does not satisfy biology major requirements."The interrelationships of women and science and engineering examined from historical, sociological, philosophical, and biological perspectives. Factors contributing to under-representation; feminist critiques of science; examination of successful strategies.  Does not satisfy biology major advanced credit requirements.""Fundamental concepts and principles of ecology dealing with organisms, populations, communities and ecosystems. Laboratory and field exercises examine ecological principles and methods as well as illustrate habitats.""Introduction to the principles of transmission and molecular genetics of plants, animals, and bacteria. Recombination, structure and replication of DNA, gene expression, cloning, quantitative and population genetics.   Students may receive graduation credit for no more than one of the following: Gen 260, Gen 313 and 313L, Gen 320, Biol 313 and 313L, and Agron 320.""Laboratory to accompany 313.   Students may receive graduation credit for no more than one of the following: Biol 313 and 313L, Gen 260, Gen 313, Gen 320, and Agron 320.""Integration of elementary principles of metabolism, bioenergetics, cell structure and function to develop a molecular view of how the cell works.""The mechanisms of evolution. Topics in microevolution: population genetics, natural selection, genetic variation, and adaptation. Macroevolution: speciation, extinction, phylogeny, and major evolutionary patterns.""Genome sequencing, assembly, structural and functional annotation, and comparative genomics. Investigating these topics will develop skills in programming and scripting (Perl and/or Python), the use of biological databases, sequence alignment, homology search, identification of sequence patterns, construction of phylogenetic trees, and comparative genomics.""Survey of molecular, genetic and cellular aspects of human diseases.  Fundamental concepts of cell biology and how they are linked to the pathologies of different classes of human diseases.  Recent scientific advances with an emphasis on new methods of diagnosis and treatment.""Introduction to physiology of metabolic function in mammals and other animals. Metabolic processes and their interactions with various subsystems, approached form an organismal perspective. Integration of cellular, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, respiratory, and renal processes, relevant to their control and integration at the nervous and endocrine system levels. Functional aspects of organismal physiology; energy and water balances, physiology of rest exercise, and environmental stress.   Students cannot receive credit for both BIOL 334 and BIOL 335."Introduction to systemic functions with emphasis on mammals.   Students cannot receive credit for both BIOL 334 and BIOL 335."Study of mechanisms by which animals perform life-sustaining functions; the evolution and adaptive significance of physiology traits, the diversity of physiological mechanisms, and how physiology and ecology interact.""Biology of human reproduction, including reproductive systems, hormones, and endocrinology of pregnancy, presented from a clinically-oriented perspective. Reviews health-related conditions such as infertility, sexually-transmitted diseases, and complicated pregnancy.""Analysis of genome, RNA, and protein data using computer technology to answer biological questions on topics ranging from microbial diversity to human health. An introduction for students in the life sciences to the fields of genomics, bioinformatics and systems.""Comprehensive survey of human anatomy, emphasizing structural and functional relationships of major organ systems. Compartmental study of normal anatomy; practical clinical application of anatomical regions.""The evolution of chordates as reflected in the anatomy of extinct and living forms. Lecture topics include the history and diversity of chordates; comparisons of anatomic structures among major groups, the adaptive significance of anatomic structures. Laboratory involves dissection of representative species.""Microscopic structure of vertebrate tissues and organs, with an introduction to histological techniques.""Biology and host-parasite relationships of major groups of animal parasites, and techniques of diagnosing and studying parasites.""Ethological and sociobiological approaches to animal behavior. Genetic and developmental aspects of behavior, biological rhythms, orientation (including navigation, migration), communication, and social behavior (mating, aggression, parental care).""Laboratory techniques for observation, description and analysis of animal activities; independent projects.""Uses of plants and fungi by humans and the importance of plants in the past, present and future. Discussion of fruits, vegetables, grains, herbs, spices, beverages, oils, fibers, wood, medicines, and drugs, in the context of their agricultural, cultural, and economic roles in modern societies. Emphasis on origins and worldwide diversity of culturally important plants, their characteristics, and uses.""Identification and ecology of North American woody plant species. Importance of woody plants in timber production and wildlife habitat. Natural disturbances, human impacts, management and restoration concerns for major North American forest regions will be addressed.""Emphasis on diversity, development, physiology and behavior of invertebrate organisms- the ""spineless wonders"" of the world. Laboratory involves hands-on study and investigation of living invertebrates.""Evolution, biology, and classification of fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Emphasis on a comparative analysis of the structure and function of organ systems. Laboratory exercises concentrate on morphology and identification of orders of vertebrates.""Introduction to plant phylogenetic systematics, plant classification, survey of flowering plant families, identification and field study of local plants.""Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) with emphasis on ecological and environmental applications. No prior GIS experience required. Guided, individualized study of topics based on student background and interest. For students with prior experience, topics and activities are selected to build upon any previous experience and minimize duplication to previous GIS coursework. Potential topics include: basic concepts of GIS, data structures, database management, spatial analysis, modeling and visualization of ecological and environmental data. Case studies in ecological and environmental applications using ArcGIS.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Quantitative techniques used in management of natural resources with emphasis on inventory and manipulation of habitat and animal populations.Introduction to the structure and function of natural environmental systems. Emphasis on the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems.Continuation of ENSCI 381. Systems approach to the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems."Extended field trips, usually during break periods, to North American locations of interest to biologists. Inquire in the Biology Program Office, 103 Bessey Hall, for trip schedule."Discussion of relevant biological and cultural topics during semester preceding extended field trips to North American locations of interest to biologists."Extended field trip to North American location under supervision of faculty member, usually during break periods, to North American locations of interest to biologists. Inquire in the Biology Program Office, 103 Bessey Hall, for trip schedule. Report required.""Extended field trips, usually during break periods, to international locations of interest to biologists. Inquire in the Biology Program Office, 103 Bessey Hall, for trip schedule."Discussion of relevant  biological and cultural topics during semester preceding extended field trip to international locations of interest to biologists."Extended field trips, under supervision of faculty member, usually during break periods, to international locations of interest to biologists. Inquire in the Biology Program Office, 103 Bessey Hall, for trip schedule.""Introductory exploration of pathology as a medical discipline. This includes study of disease mechanisms via an introduction to general pathology topics (cell degeneration, necrosis, disturbances of growth, disturbances of blood flow, inflammation, neoplasia) and organ system-specific response to injury.""Evolution of ecological adaptations at the individual, population, and species level. Emphasis is on evolutionary mechanisms and adaptive strategies related to life histories and reproduction; age and size at maturity; lifespan and senescense; offspring size/number trade-offs; sex and mating systems; sex determination and sex ratios.""Principles of embryogenesis and animal development. Establishment of body axes, organ and limb development, and specification of cell fates.  Emphasis on cell signaling and the control of gene expression within the context of a developing organism.  Medically relevant subjects will be discussed, including stem cells, cancer biology, fertilization, and cloning."Experiments and explorations illustrating fundamental principles of multicellular development.Selected topics on biological organization and function at the cellular level. Emphasis on biomembranes."An overview of classical and current concepts, principles and approaches regarding the basic mechanisms of plant function underlying growth, development and survival of plants.  Topics covered include environmental and developmental signals, plant hormone action, signal transduction, mineral nutrition, water relations, metabolism and photosynthesis.""Chemical integration of vertebrate organisms. The structure, development, and evolution of the endocrine glands and the function and structure of their hormones.""Basic principles of brain function and development. Signaling of nerve cells, synaptic transmission, structure/function of ion channels and receptors, memory and synaptic plasticity, movement and central control, sensation and sensory processing, construction of neural circuits, early brain development, complex brain functions in health and disease."Physiological adaptations to the environment with an emphasis on vertebrates."Broad overview of bioinformatics with a significant problem-solving component, including hands-on practice using computational tools to solve a variety of biological problems. Topics include: bioinformatic data processing, Perl programming, genome assembly, database search, sequence alignment, gene prediction, next-generation sequencing, comparative and functional genomics, and systems biology.""Survey of land plant evolution; phylogenetic comparison of anatomical, reproductive, and life history specializations. Relationships among bryophytes, lycophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms, and angiosperms emphasizing significant evolutionary changes documented by paleobotanical, morphological, and molecular studies.""Characteristics of cell and tissue types in vascular plants. Anatomy of developing and mature stems, roots, and leaves, including secondary (woody) growth. Introduction to the special anatomy of flowers and seeds.""Introduction to the biology and ecology of mosses, liverworts, and lichens. Emphasis on identification and diversity of local representatives of these three groups of organisms. Required field trips and service-learning.""Morphology, diversity, and ecology of fungi; their relation to agriculture, industry, and human health.""Biology, ecology, and evolution of amphibians (salamanders, frogs, caecilians) and reptiles (lizards, snakes, tuatara, turtles, crocodilians).  Emphasis on structure, physiological adaptation to different environments, behavior, reproduction, roles of amphibians and reptiles in ecosystems, and conservation.  Laboratory focus on survey methods, identification, relationships, distribution, habits, and habitats of amphibians and reptiles.""Laboratory to accompany Biology/Animal Ecology 457. Focus on survey methods, identification, relationships, distribution, habits, and habitats of amphibians and reptiles.""Biology, evolution, ecology and taxonomy of birds.  Emphasis on structure, physiology, behavior, communication, navigation, reproduction, and conservation.""Laboratory complements lecture topics with emphasis on external anatomy, identification and distribution of Midwest birds, and field trips.""Biology, ecology, and evolution of mammals.  Emphasis on structure, physiological adaptation to different environments, behavior, reproduction, roles of mammals in ecosystems, and conservation.""Laboratory focus on identification, survey methods, distribution, habits, and habitats of mammals. Several field trips.""The genetic basis of evolutionary processes in higher organisms. The role of genetic variation in adaptation, natural selection, adaptive processes, and the influence of random processes on evolutionary change.""Ecology, classification, creation and restoration, and management of wetlands.  Emphasis on North American temperate wetlands.""A comprehensive overview of the theory and methods for the analysis of biological shape with emphasis on data acquisition, standardization, statistical analysis, and visualization of results. Methods for both landmark and outline data will be discussed.""Examination of conservation issues from a population and community perspective.  The role of genetics, demography, and environment in determining population viability, habitat fragmentation, reserve design, biodiversity assessment, and restoration ecology.""The effect of interspecific interactions on the structure and dynamics of natural and managed communities; including concepts of guild structure and trophic web dynamics and their importance to the productivity, diversity, stability, and sustainability of communities. The implications of interspecifc interactions in the management of wild species will be emphasized with illustrative case histories of interactions between plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates."Principles of plant population and community ecology."The nature of adaptations to physical and biotic environments.  Biophysical, biomechanical, and physiological bases of the structure, form, growth, distribution, and abundance of organisms."Courses taken at Gulf Coast Research Laboratory and other marine biological stations are transferred to Iowa State University under this number."Courses taken at summer biological field stations are transferred to Iowa State University under this number. See www.biology.iastate.edu for links to field stations located in different biomes: coastal, Great Lakes, taiga, deciduous forests, deserts, Rocky Mountains."Students registering for courses taught by the Organization for Tropical Studies will receive credit for this ISU course when requesting a transfer of credits."Introduction of the study of ecosystems and the biological and physical factors that influence their properties and dynamics. Conceptual foundations for ecosystem studies. Interactions among organisms, biological diversity, and ecosystem attributes. Quantitative analyses of accumulations, transformations, and fluxes of nutrients, water, and energy within and among ecosystems. Global change issues.""Structure and function of aquatic ecosystems with application to fishery and pollution problems. Emphasis on lacustrine, riverine, and wetland ecology."Field trips and laboratory exercises to accompany 486. Hands-on experience with aquatic research and monitoring techniques and concepts.Introduction to major functional groups of autotrophic and heterotrophic microorganisms and their roles in natural systems."On line taxonomic and identification exercises to accompany 486. Instruction and practice in the identification of algae, aquatic macrophytes, zooplankton, and benthos.""Concepts and theories of population dynamics with emphasis on models of growth, predation, competition, and regulation.""Independent study opportunities for undergraduate students in the biological sciences.   No more than 9 credits in Biol 490 may be counted toward graduation and, of those, only 2 credits may be applied toward the Biology advanced course requirement."For students registering to be undergraduate teaching assistants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of 2 credits of BIOL 491 may be applied toward the Biology advanced course requirement."For students considering pursuing a graduate degree in the biological sciences. Professional development topics including the defining of academic and career areas of interest, finding and evaluating appropriate programs of graduate study, the graduate school application process, and developing a curriculum vita. Exploration of learning opportunities at field stations, research internships, and independent research activities.""Intended to provide credit for significant professional experiences in biological sciences. A written proposal is required prior to registration. Intended for Biology majors.   No more than 9 credits in BIOL 494 may be counted toward graduation and, of those, only 6 credits may be applied toward the Biology advanced course requirement.""Content varies from year to year and may include detailed discussion of special topics in biology, current issues in biology, or careers in biology."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Research opportunities for undergraduate students in the biological sciences.  Intended for Biology majors.   No more than 9 credits in Biol 499 may be counted toward graduation and, of those, only 6 credits may be applied toward the Biology advanced course requirement."Survey of body systems of  domestic animals. Provides a medical science orientation particularly useful to students in a preveterinary medicine curriculum.Anatomy of the dog."Comparative and topographic anatomy of horse, ruminants, pig, and chicken.""Microscopic anatomy and physiology of cells, tissues, cardiovascular system, respiratory system, and urinary system.""Microscopic anatomy of the immune system and integument. Microscopic anatomy and physiology of the digestive system, endocrine system, and reproductive system.""Descriptions of molecular and cellular biology especially as it pertains to veterinary medicine.  Discussions of cellular components, cellular functions and anomalies thereof.  Emphasis placed on divergences relevant to companion animals and livestock.""Introduce basic biochemical aspects of metabolism and function of energy, protein, fat, minerals and vitamins in the diet.  Determine nutrient requirements of food animals, pets, and horses under various physiological states.  Understand fate of various nutrients in simple stomached animals, ruminants, and cecal fermenters.  Discuss clinical nutrition problems specific to each species."Neuroanatomy of domestic animals."Canine physical examination; basic behavior, animal handling and restraint; medical record keeping."Clinical applications of basic sciences taught concurrently in the fall semester of the first year curriculum in veterinary medicine.Clinical applications of basic sciences taught concurrently in the spring semester of the first year curriculum in veterinary medicine."General principles; drug disposition; drugs acting on the nervous, cardiovascular, renal, gastrointestinal, and endocrine systems.""8 week course. Introductory course with focus on fin fish production, health and medicine. Course content will help define future roles for veterinarians, producers, and service providers.  Emphasis will be placed on anatomy, pathology, infectious diseases, nutrition, regulatory constraints in production, food safety, and current research. Field trip to aquaculture facility."Normal and abnormal behavior of domestic animals."Pharmacology and therapeutic uses of fluids, antimicrobial and antiparasitic drugs, clinical use of veterinary drugs, and adverse drug reactions.""Examination of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of human and dog. Laboratories will include cadaveric and virtual dissection, clinical case studies, and problem based learning.""International Preceptorships and Study Abroad Group programs. This course will provide opportunities for students to be involved in applied clinical, production, and/or research experiences in international locations. The course consists of 40 hour per week experiential learning opportunities.""Experience in biomedical techniques in selected BMS laboratories that include but is not limited to cytochemical methods, molecular biological techniques, extracellular and intracellular unit recording, microiontophoresis, microinjection, spectrophoto-fluorometric analysis of chemicals,  use of radioisotopes, radioimmunoassay, Ca2+ imaging, confocal microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, and immunocytochemistry.""Provides laboratory experience in the application of methods in biomedical sciences, including animal physiology and pharmacology laboratory techniques; human physiology recordings and urinalysis; pharmacokinetics; basic techniques in analytical laboratory; basic pathology, immunology, bacteriology, and virology laboratory techniques."Anatomy of the dog."Comparative and topographic anatomy of horse, ruminants, pig, and chicken.""Microscopic anatomy and physiology of cells, tissues, cardiovascular system, respiratory system, and urinary system.""Microscopic anatomy of the immune system and integument. Microscopic anatomy and physiology of the digestive system, endocrine system, and reproductive system."Neuroanatomy of domestic animals."Principles of neurophysiology, endocrine and reproductive physiology, muscle physiology, cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, and digestive physiology, and regulation of body fluid.""General principles of drug actions; drug disposition; drug acting or, cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, gastrointestinal, and endocrine systems; anti-inflammatory and antibiotic drug; anti-cancer drugs; anesthetics CNS stimulants; lifestyle drugs; drug addiction, abuse and dependence; drugs in sport; drugs for obesity; biopharmaceuticals and gene therapy; drug development."Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Techniques. Includes: fermentation, protein isolation, protein purification, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, NMR, confocal microscopy and laser microdissection, Immunophenotyping, and monoclonal antibody production. Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Pharmacology and therapeutic uses of fluids, antimicrobial and antiparasitic drugs, clinical use of veterinary drugs, and adverse drug reactions.""Examination of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of human and dog. Laboratories will include cadaveric and virtual dissection, clinical case studies, and problem based learning.""General principles; drug disposition; drugs acting on the nervous, cardiovascular, renal, gastrointestinal, and endocrine systems.""Fundamental principles of neuroscience including cellular and molecular neuroscience, nervous system development, sensory, motor and regulatory systems.""A multi-instructor course covering major topics in cell structure and function, including:  universal features of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, types of utilization and conversion of energy, genetic control of cell shape and functionality, internal organization of cells, communication between cells and their environment, development of multicellular systems.  Students have to write a term paper."Creative component for non-thesis Master of Science degree.A forum for B M S students to gain experience in the critical exchange of ideas through oral presentation and discussion of scientific information.Attendance and presentation required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Attendance to all B M S seminars and written reports are required.An overview of the chemical industry including structure and its evolution. Discussion of the dynamics of recent introduction of biorenewable chemicals to the chemical industry."Develop an understanding of the relationship between discovery research entrepreneurship and innovation in biorenewables. Understand critical techno-commercial analyses and intellectual property. Learn critical skills needed to found a company, including how to define key assets, write a business plan, leverage local resources, and secure funding."Special topics in biorenewable chemicals."Understanding of Discovery Research for sixth through 12th grade science teachers. Design, methods and analysis of research associated with biorenewable energy systems. Science teachers will be introduced to the value of scientific inquiry, elements of engineering design, 21st century careers in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) and how high school students need to be prepared for these careers."Principles and applications of heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis. Adsorption. Reaction kinetics and mass transfer effects. Catalyst characterization. Industrial catalytic processes."Introduction to the science and engineering of converting biorenewable resources into bioenergy and biobased products. Survey of biorenewable resource base and properties; description of biofuels and biobased products; production of biorenewable resources; processing technologies for fuels, chemicals, materials, and energy; environmental impacts; technoeconomic analysis of production and processing; and biofuels policy."Research presentations throughout the semester as part of the course seminar series and during the course. Research Poster Symposium at the end of the semester. Typically taken in the last semester(s) when completing degree program.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Develop an understanding of the relationship between discovery research entrepreneurship and innovation in biorenewables. Understand critical techno-commercial analyses and intellectual property. Learn critical skills needed to found a company, including how to define key assets, write a business plan, leverage local resources, and secure funding.""Evaluation of the biorenewables field as it relates to the areas of law and policy. Primary emphasis on the following topics: concerns that motivated the development and expansion of the biorenewables field, a history of the interactions between biorenewable pathways. U.S. law and policy and controversies that have arisen from these interactions and their effects.""Evaluation of the international biorenewables field as it relates to the areas of law and policy. Primary emphasis on the following topics: concerns that motivated the development and expansion of the field by adopting countries, a history of the interactions between biorenewable pathways. Law and policy in adopting countries and international controversies that have arisen from these interactions and their effects.""Introduction to thermal and catalytic processes for the conversion of biomass to biofuels and other biobased products. Topics include gasification, fast pyrolysis, hydrothermal processing, syngas to synfuels, and bio-oil upgrading. Application of thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid dynamics to bioenergy and biofuels.""Sustainability, cleaner production. Taxonomy, kinetics, metabolism, microbial cultivation, aerobic and anaerobic fermentation. Antibiotics, food supplements, fermented foods, vitamin production. Biofuels, bioenergy and coproducts. Mass/energy balances, process integration, pretreatment, separation. Membrane reactors, bioelectrolysis, microbial fuel cells, nanotechnology, genetic engineering, mutagenesis.""Investigation/study of an approved barrier area(s) topic on an individual basis. Course content and requirements designed and developed in consultation with the student's major professor/instructor to determine barrier areas covered, but in all cases a formal report should be written.""An introduction to hands-on experimental laboratory techniques including laboratory safety, calibration, proper usage of chemistry apparatus, chemicals, analytical equipment, and fundamental techniques to ensure successful research.""Properties and applications of industrial enzymes important in food, feed, and bioprocessing, including biofuels and bioproducts. Characterization of enzyme catalytic mechanisms, kinetics, isolation, mutagenesis, and operating conditions, including evaluation of substrates, products, immobilization, enzyme inhibitors, pH, pressure, and temperature.""A required orientation for all College of Business Students involved with a Business Learning Team.  Review of college and university requirements, transfer credits, academic planning, university policies and deadlines and registration procedures.  Includes a consideration of various business majors and careers, tools for success in college including writing skills and presentations from employers, alumni and current students.   Only one of BusAd 101, 102, or 103X may be counted towards graduation.""A required orientation for all College of Business students. Review of college and university requirements, transfer credits, academic planning, university policies and deadlines, and registration procedures. Includes group advising for course selection and registration.   Only one of BUSAD 101, 102, or 103 may be counted toward graduation.""Careers in business and issues relevant to the workplace. Discussion of diversity and ethics issues in the workplace. Developing and implementing a professional job search, functioning professionally in the workplace setting, resume and profession correspondence, interviewing, evaluating offers, business etiquette, networking and transitioning from student to employee."Introduction to the functional areas of business and how the functional areas are integrated for the purpose of implementing business strategy. Introduces students to decision making tools (spreadsheets and databases) that are integral to business decision making. Includes application   exercises to all functional areas of business.Supervised work experience in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised work experience in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised work experience in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised travel and study experience in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised travel and study experience in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Topics related to entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial thinking. Presentations by entrepreneurs and faculty, field trips, business concept development."Required of all cooperative education students engaged in full-time internship/co-op. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period. No more than three credits may be taken in addition to BUSAD 398 during any given semester.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Independent Study.Supervised work experience in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised work experience in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised work experience in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised travel and study in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised travel and study in a business related discipline.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised work experience in a business related discipline.Critical analysis of current practice and case studies in strategic management with an emphasis on integrative decision making.  Strategy formulation and implementation will be investigated in the context of complex business environments."Introduction to the sources and statistical analysis of data as well as optimization models for use in making business decisions. Data collection, descriptive and inferential statistics including hypothesis testing, analysis of variance, multiple regression, linear programming and simulation.""Introduction to a broad variety of information systems (IS) topics, including current and emerging developments in information technology (IT), IT strategy in the context of corporate strategy, and IS planning and development of enterprise architectures.  Cases, reading, and discussions highlight the techniques and tactics used by managers to cope with strategic issues within an increasingly technical and data-driven competitive environment.""Integration of the business functions concerned with the marketing and movement of goods along the supply chain with the primary goal of creating value for the ultimate customer. Coordination of marketing, production, and logistics activities within the firm and with outside suppliers and customers in the supply chain.""Understanding human behavior in organizations, and the nature of organizations from a managerial perspective.  Special emphasis on how individual differences, such as perceptions, personality, and motivation, influence individual and group behavior in organizations and on how behavior can be influenced by job design, leadership, groups, and the structure of organizations.""Survey of fundamental topics in accounting and finance.  Financial statement reporting and analysis for agriculture firms, corporate governance issues related to financial reporting, (e.g., Sarbanes-Oxley). Basic tools and techniques used in financial management, including stock and bond valuation. How to assess and use capital budgeting methods to evaluate proposed firm investments.""Cultural, financial, economic, political, legal/regulatory environments shaping an organization's international business strategy.  Topics include entry (and repatriation) of people, firms, goods, services, and capital. Special attention to the institutions of seed regulation and policy. Ethical issues facing managers operating in an international context.""Team taught by faculty in the Department of Economics and the College of Business, this course focuses on applied economic and business tools for decision making. The topics include: Monte Carlo analysis with applications to option pricing and insurance mechanism design, portfolio analysis using existing standard spreadsheet software and add-ons, dynamic programming tools for inventory management and sequential decisions, discrete choice modeling and statistical bootstrapping, and financial performance evaluation using commercially available software."A special topics course covering contemporary issues in business. Topics vary by semester.Academically supervised travel and/or work experiences in a business related discipline."Provides first-year MBA students with tools necessary to develop and implement a successful internship and career search, and to develop professional skills critical for success in the competitive business environment.  Topics include career search strategy, resume and cover letter development, interviewing, strategic networking, salary negotiation, impression management, team skills development, presentation skills development, and business etiquette. Required for all full-time MBA students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""A second course designed to improve the professional skills of first-year MBA students.  Emphasis on building effective communications and networking skills. Students will participate in professional workshops, company visits, executive speaker seminars, service learning projects, business case competitions, and related activities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Professional work experience. Students must register for this course prior to commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Preparation and writing of creative component.Preparation and writing of creative component.Preparation and writing of creative component.Preparation and writing of creative component.Preparation and writing of creative component.Preparation and writing of creative component.Preparation and writing of creative component.Preparation and writing of creative component.Preparation and writing of creative component.A survey of the wide variety of research methods used in business. Methods will be presented and discussed with emphasis on applicability in different research situations.Research.(1-0) Curriculum in career planning and academic course support for Freshmen learning team."Formulation and solution of engineering problems. Significant figures.  Use of SI units.  Graphing and curve-fitting.  Flowcharting.  Introduction to material balances, engineering economics, and design.  Use of spreadsheet programs to solve and present engineering problems.  Solution of engineering problems using computer programming languages.  Chemical Engineering examples.""Professionalism in the context of the engineering/technical workplace.  Introduction to chemical engineering career opportunities.  Process and workplace safety.  Development and demonstration of key workplace competencies:  teamwork, professionalism and ethical responsibility, ability to engage in life-long learning, and knowledge of contemporary issues.  Resumes; professional portfolios; preparation for internship experiences.""Curriculum and career planning, academic course support for learning community.""Assessment of proficiency in general chemistry, calculus (including infinite series and applications of derivatives and integrals), and material balances, and an ability to use the principles of science and mathematics to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to chemical processes. Physical behavior of gases, liquids, and solids. Application of material and energy balances to chemical engineering equipment and processes.""Engineering analysis of basic biology and engineering problems associated with living systems and health care delivery. The course will illustrate biomedical engineering applications in such areas as: biotechnology, biomechanics, biomaterials and tissue engineering, and biosignal and image processing, and will introduce the basic life sciences and engineering concepts associated with these topics."First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Numerical methods for solving systems of linear and nonlinear equations, ordinary differential equations, numerical differentiation and integration, and nonlinear regression using chemical engineering examples.""Experiments covering fundamental material and energy balances, momentum and energy transport operations, and thermodynamics. Computer applications.""Momentum and mechanical energy balances. Incompressible and compressible fluid flow. Applications to fluid drag, piping system design, filtration, packed beds and settling.""Conduction and diffusion, convective heat and mass transfer, boiling and condensation, radiation, and design of heat exchange equipment. Introduction to diffusion.""Diffusion and mass transfer in fluids. Analysis and design of continuous contacting and multistage separation processes. Binary and multicomponent distillation, absorption, extraction, evaporation, membrane processes, and simultaneous heat and mass transfer.""Application of thermodynamic principles to chemical engineering problems. Thermodynamic properties of fluids, phase equilibria, and chemical reaction equilibria."Kinetics of chemical reactions. Design of homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical reactors.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for graduation allowable only upon completion of Ch E 392.Study of chemical engineering including laboratories and lectures at collaborating international universities. Comparative study of U.S. and international manufacturing facilities. Expenses required.Summer professional work period. Students must register for this course prior to commencing work.One semester maximum per academic year professional work period. Students must register for this course prior to commencing work.Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Examines the mechanisms and rates of chemical transport across air, water, and soil interfaces. Applications of transport and thermodynamic fundamentals to movement of chemicals in the environment.""Examines the factors underlying interfacial phenomena, with an emphasis on the thermodynamics of surfaces, structural aspects, and electrical phenomena. Application areas include emulsification, foaming, detergency, sedimentation, fluidization, nucleation, wetting, adhesion, flotation, and electrophoresis."Application of basic chemical engineering principles in biochemical and biological process industries such as enzyme technology and fermentation."Application of transport phenomena, thermodynamics, and chemical kinetics to the study of safety, health, and loss prevention.  Government regulations, industrial hygiene, relief sizing, runaway reactions, toxic release, and dispersion models will be used.  Fires, explosions, risk assessment, hazard identification, case studies, accident investigations, and design considerations will be studied."Control of industrial chemical processes. Device applications and limitations. Dynamics of chemical process components and process control systems."Experiments in heat and mass transfer, staged operations, chemical reactor performance, unit processes. Computer applications.   Only one of Ch E 426 or 427 may count toward graduation."Experiments on biological applications in chemical engineering.   Only one of CH E 426 or CH E 427 may count toward graduation."Synthesis of chemical engineering processes, equipment and plants. Cost estimation and feasibility analysis.""Applications of material and energy balances, transport phenomena, chemical reaction engineering, and thermodynamics to problems in biomedical engineering and applied physiology; survey of biomedical engineering; biomaterials; biomedical imaging.""Chemistry of polymers, addition and condensation polymerization. Physical and mechanical properties, polymer rheology, production methods. Applications of polymers in the chemical industry."Investigation of topics of special interest to student and faculty with a final written report or presentation. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by Department with completion of Study Proposal.   No more than 6 credits of ChE 490 may be counted towards technical electives.Investigation of topics of special interest to student and faculty with a final written report or presentation. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by Department with completion of Study Proposal.   No more than 6 credits of ChE 490 may be counted towards technical electives.Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Examines the mechanisms and rates of chemical transport across air, water, and soil interfaces. Applications of transport and thermodynamic fundamentals to movement of chemicals in the environment.""Examines the factors underlying interfacial phenomena, with an emphasis on the thermodynamics of surfaces, structural aspects, and electrical phenomena. Application areas include emulsification, foaming, detergency, sedimentation, fluidization, nucleation, wetting, adhesion, flotation, and electrophoresis."Application of basic chemical engineering principles in biochemical and biological process industries such as enzyme technology and fermentation."Applications of material and energy balances, transport phenomena, chemical reaction engineering, and thermodynamics to problems in biomedical engineering and applied physiology; survey of biomedical engineering; biomaterials; biomedical imaging.""Polymeric biomaterials, overview of biomaterial requirements, different classes of polymers used as biomaterials, specific bioapplications of polymers.""Analysis of equipment and processes by analytic and/or numerical solution of descriptive differential equations. Operational and series techniques, boundary value problems, numerical interpolation and approximation, integration techniques.""Chemistry of polymers, addition and condensation polymerization. Physical and mechanical properties, polymer rheology, production methods. Applications of polymers in the chemical industry.""Conservation equations governing diffusive and convective transport of momentum, thermal energy and chemical species.  Transport during laminar flow in conduits, boundary layer flow, creeping flow.  Heat and mass transport coupled with chemical reactions and phase change.  Scaling and approximation methods for mathematical solution of transport models. Diffusive fluxes; conservation equations for heat and mass transfer; scaling and approximation techniques; fundamentals of fluid mechanics; unidirectional flow; creeping flow; laminar flow at high Reynolds number; forced-convection heat and mass transfer in confined and unconfined laminar flows.""Principles and techniques for separation and recovery of biologically-produced molecules, especially proteins. Relationship between the chemistry of biological molecules and efficient separation and preservation of biological activity. Includes centrifugation and filtration, membrane processing, extraction, precipitation and crystallization, chromatography, and electrophoresis.""Qualitative features of turbulence. Statistical representation of turbulent velocity fields: averages, moments, correlations, length and time scales and the energy cascade. Averaged equations of motion, closure requirements, Reynolds averaged models. Homogeneous shear flows, free shear flows, boundary layers. Numerical simulation of turbulence: DNS, LES, DES."Application of thermodynamic principles to chemical engineering problems. Thermodynamic properties of non-ideal fluids and solutions; phase and chemical-reaction equilibria/stability."Analysis of complex reactions and kinetics. Fixed bed, fluidized bed, and other industrial reactors. Analysis and design of non-ideal flow mixing, and residence times. Heterogeneous reactors."Investigation of an approved topic on an individual basis.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Principles of metabolic engineering. Emphasis on emerging examples in biorenewables and plant metabolic engineering. Overview of biochemical pathways, determination of flux distributions by stoichiometric and labeling techniques; kinetics and thermodynamics of metabolic networks; metabolic control analysis; genetic engineering for overexpression, deregulation, or inhibition of enzymes; directed evolution; application of bioinformatics, genomics, and proteomics.""Single particle, mutliparticle and two-phase fluid flow phenomena (gas-solid, liquid-solid and gas-liquid mixtures); particle interactions, transport phenomena, wall effects; bubbles, equations of multiphase flow. Dense phase (fluidized and packed beds) and ducted flows; momentum, heat and mass transfer. Computer solutions.""Principles of statistical physics. General features of molecular simulations including Monte Carlo (MC) methods, molecular mechanics (MM), and molecular dynamics (MD). Overview of intermolecular and interatomic potentials. Evaluation of phase equilibria, free energies, and surface/interfacial properties. Coarse-grained methods.""Advanced topics in momentum transport, fluid mechanics, and mass transport including study of recent literature."Principles and applications of heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis. Adsorption. Reaction kinetics and mass transfer effects. Catalyst characterization. Industrial catalytic processes.Investigation of an approved topic on an individual basis. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by Program of Study Committee.One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period."Discussions intended to foster the development of graduate students as teaching assistants and future chemical engineering instructors. Topics include classroom and laboratory instruction, grading, and developing a teaching philosophy.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Advanced topic for thesis/dissertation."An in-depth active learning experience designed to impart the fundamental concepts and principles of chemistry, with an emphasis on mathematics skills and logical thinking. For students intending to enroll in general chemistry and who have not taken high school chemistry or who have not had a high school college preparatory chemistry course who need a review of chemical problem solving and chemical concepts.   Credit for Chem 50 does not count toward graduation.""Integration of first year and transfer students into the chemistry program. Introduction and overview of  degree requirements and support services on campus, assistance with transition to college and community life, and team-building and leadership activities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Integration of first year and transfer students into the chemistry program. Introduction and overview of  degree requirements and support services on campus, assistance with transition to college and community life, and team-building and leadership activities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Integration of first year and transfer students into the chemistry program. Introduction and overview of  degree requirements and support services on campus, assistance with transition to college and community life, and team-building and leadership activities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Physical science principles for future elementary teachers.  Emphasis on experiments that address current elementary science education standards and that are appropriate for their future students to do, such as measurements of mass, length, time, light from atoms, charge and current, motion due to forces, energy and work, heat, waves, optics, building bridges and making musical instruments, studying states of matter and chemical reactions.""Overview of careers in chemistry: industrial, governmental, and academic careers; literature and compound search instruction; professional ethics; and an introduction to joining a research lab.  For students majoring or minoring in chemistry or chemistry-related fields.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Aspects of chemistry visible to a non-scientist in our society. A survey of selected areas of chemistry with emphasis on the interface between chemistry and other fields of human activity."A general survey of chemistry with an emphasis on conceptual problems for those who are not physical and biological science or engineering majors. Nomenclature, chemical reactions, stoichiometry, atomic structure, periodic properties, chemical bonding, states of matter, solutions, thermochemistry, acid-base theory, oxidation-reduction reactions, basic chemical kinetics, and chemical equilibrium.   Only one of Chem 163, 167, 177, or 201 may count toward graduation.""Laboratory to accompany CHEM 163. Must be taken with CHEM 163.   Only one of Chem 163L, CHEM 167L, and CHEM 177L may count toward graduation.""Principles of chemistry and properties of matter explained in terms of modern chemical theory with emphasis on topics of general interest to the engineer.   Only one of Chem 163, 167, 177, or 201 may count toward graduation.""Laboratory to accompany 167.   Only one of Chem 163L, 167L, and 177L may count toward graduation.""The first semester of a two semester sequence which explores chemistry at a greater depth and with more emphasis on concepts, problems, and calculations than 163. Recommended for physical and biological science majors, chemical engineering majors, and all others intending to take 300-level chemistry courses. Principles and quantitative relationships, stoichiometry, chemical equilibrium, acid-base chemistry, thermochemistry, rates and mechanism of reactions, changes of state, solution behavior, atomic structure, periodic relationships, chemical bonding.   Only one of Chem 163, 167, 177, or 201 may count toward graduation.""Laboratory to accompany 177. 177L must be taken with 177.   Only one of Chem 163L, 167L, and 177L may count toward graduation.""Laboratory to accompany CHEM 177. CHEM 177N must be taken with CHEM 177.   Only one of Chem 163L, CHEM 167L, and CHEM 177N may count toward graduation.""Continuation of 177. Recommended for physical or biological science majors, chemical engineering majors, and all others intending to take 300-level chemistry courses."Laboratory to accompany 178. 178L is not a necessary co-requisite with 178."A one-semester course in general chemistry designed to give students an in-depth, broad-based view of modern chemistry, and, in part, to facilitate participation in independent undergraduate research.  Topics include stoichiometry, atomic and molecular structure, chemical bonding, kinetics, chemical equilibria, and thermodynamics.  Discussion of current trends in various chemical disciplines, which may be given by guest experts in chemistry, biochemistry, and chemical engineering, will help the student appreciate the scope of the chemical sciences and how research is carried out.   Only one of Chem 163, 167, 177, or 201 may count toward graduation.""Laboratory to accompany 201. Introductory lab experience in synthesis and analysis to prepare students for research activities. 201L must be taken with 201.   Only one of 163L, 167L, 177L, 177N or 201L may count toward graduation.""Theory and practice of elementary volumetric, chromatographic, electrochemical and spectrometric methods of analysis. Chemical equilibrium, sampling, and data evaluation. Emphasis on environmental analytical chemistry; the same methods are widely used in biological and materials sciences as well.""Introductory laboratory experience in volumetric, spectrometric, electrochemical and chromatographic methods of chemical analysis.""A survey of modern organic chemistry including nomenclature, structure and bonding, and reactions of hydrocarbons and important classes of natural and synthetic organic compounds. For students desiring only an elementary course in organic chemistry. Students in physical or biological sciences and premedical or preveterinary curricula should take the full year sequence 331 and 332 (with the accompanying laboratories 331L and 332L).   Only one of Chem 231 and 331 or BBMB 221 may count toward graduation."Laboratory to accompany 231. 231L must be taken with 231.   Only one of Chem 231L and 331L may count toward graduation.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Atomic and molecular structure and bonding principles; molecular shapes and symmetry; acids and bases; solid-state structures and properties; inorganic chemistry of H, B, C.""Quantitative and qualitative instrumental analysis. Operational theory of instruments, atomic and molecular absorption and emission spectroscopy, electroanalysis, mass spectrometry, liquid and gas chromatography, electrophoresis, literature of chemical analysis.""Advanced laboratory experience in UV-visible spectrophotometry, atomic absorption and emission spectrometry, electrochemistry, gas and liquid chromatography, electrophoresis, mass spectrometry, and other instrumental methods.""Error analysis; use of computers for interfacing to experiments and for data analysis; thermodynamics, infrared and optical spectroscopy, lasers. Not applicable towards the B.S. degree in Chemistry.   Only one of Chem 321L and 322L may count toward graduation.""Error analysis; use of computers for interfacing to experiments and for data analysis; thermodynamics, surface science, infrared and optical spectroscopy, lasers.   Only one of Chem 321L and 322L may count toward graduation.""Quantum mechanics, atomic and molecular structure, spectroscopy, kinetic theory of gases, chemical kinetics.""Classical thermodynamics 1st, 2nd, and 3rd laws with applications to gases and interfacial systems, multicomponent, multiphase equilibrium of reacting systems, surface chemistry, and electrochemical cells. Students taking a two-semester physical chemistry sequence are advised to take 324 first; in the spring semester, a molecular-based section of this course, stressing statistical thermodynamics, is offered for which knowledge of 324 is useful.""The first half of a two semester sequence. Modern organic chemistry including nomenclature, synthesis, structure and bonding, reaction mechanisms. For students majoring in physical and biological sciences, premedical and pre-veterinary curricula, chemistry and biochemistry. Students desiring only one semester of organic chemistry should take 231 and 231L, not 331.   Only one of Chem 231 and 331 may count toward graduation."Laboratory to accompany 331. Chemistry and biochemistry majors are encouraged to take 333L.   Only one of Chem 231L and 331L may count toward graduation."Continuation of 331. Modern organic chemistry including nomenclature, synthesis, structure and bonding, reaction mechanisms, natural products, carbohydrates and proteins. For students majoring in physical and biological sciences, premedical and pre-veterinary curricula, chemistry and biochemistry."Laboratory to accompany 332. Chemistry and biochemistry majors are encouraged to take 334L.Laboratory to accompany 331 for chemistry and biochemistry majors.Laboratory to accompany 332 for chemistry and biochemistry majors.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period.Undergraduate research.   No more than six total credits of Chem 399 and Chem 499 may count toward graduation. Credits earned in 399/499/490 may only be use to meet one of the advanced course requirements for the B.S. degree.Preparation and characterization of inorganic and organometallic compounds by modern techniques. For students majoring in chemistry or biochemistry."Chemistry of the d and f metals. Structure, bonding, electronic spectra, and reaction mechanisms. Aspects of organometallic solid state and bioinorganic chemistry."No more than 9 credits of Chem 490 may count toward graduation.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Research in chosen area of chemistry, with final written report as senior thesis. This course should be elected for two consecutive semesters. For students majoring in chemistry.   No more than six total credits for Chem 399 and 499 may count toward graduation."Preparation and characterization of inorganic and organometallic compounds by modern research techniques."Chemistry of the main group (s, p) and transition (d, f) metals. Structure, bonding, electronic spectra, and reaction mechanisms. Aspects of organometallic, solid state, bioinorganic, and nano chemistry."Elementary group theory and molecular orbital theory applied to inorganic chemistry. Spectroscopic methods of characterization of inorganic compounds and organometallic compounds.General methods of quantitative inorganic and organic analysis. Aqueous and nonaqueous titrimetry; selective reagents; sampling and sample dissolution; modern instrumentation; sensors; atomic and molecular microscopy; bioanalytical methods; data evaluation; chemometrics; and analytical literature."Principles of convective-diffusional mass transport in electroanalysis. Applications of potentiometry, voltammetry, and coulometry. Introduction to heterogeneous and homogeneous kinetics in electroanalysis. Analog and digital circuitry. Interfacing.""Introduction to physical optics and design of photometric instruments. Principles of absorption, emission, fluorescence, and Raman spectroscopy. Error and precision of optical methods. Ultraviolet, visible, and infrared methods of qualitative and quantitative organic and inorganic analysis.""Principles and examples of inorganic and organic separation methods applied to analytical chemistry. Solvent extraction, volatilization, ion exchange, liquid and gas chromatography, and electrophoresis."Survey of organic functional group transformations.Synthesis of complex organic compounds including natural products."Survey of reactive intermediates including cations, anions, carbenes, and radicals.""Molecular structure, stereochemistry, introduction to reaction mechanisms, thermodynamic and kinetic data, linear free energy relationships, isotope effects, orbital symmetry."Introduction to laboratory safety and chemical hygiene. Use of engineering controls and personal protective equipment. Chemical storage and waste disposal practices. Handling hazardous chemicals. Radiation safety and laser safety.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Methods of instruction, strategies and techniques for effective teaching and learning along with practice teaching in undergraduate chemistry recitation and laboratory courses. Cooperative learning, guided-inquiry, learning cycles, conceptual change, models and modeling, concept maps, visualization, computer simulations, web-based delivery systems, and learning theories.""Schroedinger equation and exact solutions; square wells and barriers; harmonic oscillator; the hydrogen atom; atomic orbitals; operators including angular momenta; time-independent and time-dependent perturbation theory; Schroedinger and Heisenberg representations; unitary operators; interaction picture, density matrix.""Variational method, many electron atoms; addition of angular momentum, self-consistent field method for open and closed shells, linear combinations of atomic orbitals, origin of chemical bonding, many-electron diatomic and polyatomic molecules, treatments of electron correlation, approximation methods.""Microscopic and macroscopic properties, laws of thermodynamics, ensembles and distribution functions, applications to gases, solids, and chemical equilibrium.""Maxwell's field equations, interaction of light with matter including time-dependent perturbation theory, microwave, vibrational (infra-red, Raman) and electronic spectroscopies, symmetry derived selection rules, special lineshapes and introduction to nonlinear and coherent laser spectroscopies.""Structural principles, synthetic strategies, analytical methods, and chemical bonding issues applied to solids.  Atomic packings and networks, short-range vs. long-range order, defects; phase diagrams, reactive fluxes, chemical transport; diffraction, spectroscopy; energy bands and their bonding interpretations.""Principles of infrared, ultraviolet, nuclear magnetic resonance, and mass spectroscopy as applied to organic chemistry.""Transition metal complexes with ligands such as cyclopentadienyl, olefins, acetylenes, benzenes, and carbon monoxide. Coverage of structure, bonding, reactivity, fundamental mechanisms, and homogeneous catalysis.""Gas-surface interactions and techniques of characterization. Idealized surface lattices, surface tension, Wulff plots, work function, adsorbate-adsorbate interactions, 2D phase diagrams, diffusion, thin film growth, adsorption and desorption mechanisms/energetics/kinetics, adsorption isotherms, vacuum techniques, electron- and ion-based spectroscopies for surface analysis (including AES, FIM, XPS, UPS, EXAFS, EELS, SIMS, LEED and STM).""Basic physics, instrumentation, chemical and biological applications of mass spectrometry.""Rates and mechanisms; reversible, consecutive, and competing reactions; chain mechanisms; kinetic isotope effects; very rapid reactions; acid-base catalysis, theories of unimolecular reactions; transition state and Marcus theories."Introduction to the various areas of research in chemistry at Iowa State University."Basic principles of quantum mechanics, schrodinger equation. Hartree-Fock/molecular orbital theory, introduction to group theory, introduction to modern methods of computational chemistry; applications include molecular structure, potential energy surfaces and their relation to chemical reactions; molecular spectroscopy, photochemistry, solvent effects and surface chemistry.""Basic concepts and theorems, representation theory; point groups, molecular orbitals, molecular states, molecular vibrations, rotation group and angular momenta; space groups and crystals; permutation group, antisymmetry, and spin states."Topics such as molecular structure and bonding; organometallic compounds; physical techniques of structure determination; nonaqueous solutions; Zintl phases; transition-metal oxides; free-radical reactions; electron transfer reactions; metal-metal bonding; and bioinorganic chemistry of nucleic acids."Raman spectroscopy, sensors, spectroelectrochemistry, capillary electrophoresis, analytical plasmas, chemometrics and bioanalytical chemistry.""Topics of current interest in organic chemistry such as spectroscopy, physical organic chemistry, photochemistry, organometallic chemistry, mechanisms of oxidations and reductions, modern organic synthesis, reactive intermediates, bioorganic chemistry, and polymers."Advanced and recent developments in physical chemistry are selected for each offering.Introduction to spoken and written colloquial Mandarin through pinyin and simplified characters.Introduction to spoken and written colloquial Mandarin through pinyin and simplified characters."Development of speaking, writing, reading, and listening skills. Review and expansion of grammar skills, intensification of character acquisition.""Development of speaking, writing, reading, and listening skills. Review and expansion of grammar skills, intensification of character acquisition.""Interdisciplinary introduction to Chinese society and culture from earliest times to the present. Topics include ancient literature, philosophy, religion, art, architecture, customs, transition to a modern society, social changes, urban life, popular culture, and contemporary values and ideas.""Continuing development of speaking, writing, reading, and listening skills beyond intermediate level. Expansion of cultural literacy through a variety of texts from the humanities, social sciences, mass media and business.""Continuing development of speaking, writing, reading, and listening skills beyond intermediate level. Expansion of cultural literacy through a variety of texts from the humanities, social sciences, mass media and business.""Introduction to professional language and culture in China and Chinese-speaking regions in Asia. Development of all four language skills, focusing on practical applications in the professional contexts. Development of global awareness and cross-cultural understanding. Preparation for internships.""Topics may include traditional prose, poetry, novel and drama; twentieth-century fiction and film. All readings and class discussions in English.""Focusing on contemporary society, culture, literature and the arts. All readings, discussions, and papers in English. Topics vary from year to year.""Critical understanding of authentic texts at the advanced level through reading, translation, and/or application in professional contexts; consolidation of existing language skills, in-depth analysis of cultural issues, and development of professional language proficiency. Taught in Chinese.""Critical understanding of authentic texts at the advanced level through reading, translation, and/or application in professional contexts; consolidation of existing language skills, in-depth analysis of cultural issues, and development of professional language proficiency. Taught in Chinese.""Critical understanding of authentic texts at the advanced level through reading, translation, and/or application in professional contexts; consolidation of existing language skills, in-depth analysis of cultural issues, and development of professional language proficiency. Taught in Chinese.""Critical understanding of authentic texts at the advanced level through reading, translation, and/or application in professional contexts; consolidation of existing language skills, in-depth analysis of cultural issues, and development of professional language proficiency. Taught in Chinese."Designed to meet student needs in areas beyond current course offerings or to accommodate the desire to integrate a study of literature or language with special issues in major fields."Overview of the nature and scope of the civil engineering profession. Exploration of the various specialty areas within civil engineering. Bloom's Taxonomy and creativity. Departmental rules, student services operations, degree requirements, educational objectives, program of study planning, career options, and student organizations.""Introduction to error theory. Fundamentals of observing distances, elevations, and angles. Traversing. Irregular areas. Circular and parabolic curves. Earthwork including mass diagrams. Construction staking. Computer applications and introduction to photogrammetry, geographic information systems and global positioning systems technology.""Integration of first-year students into the Civil Engineering program.  Assignments and activities involving teamwork, academic preparation, study skills, and preparation for entry into the Civil Engineering profession.  Completed both individually and in learning teams under the direction of faculty and peer mentors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Formulation of engineering problems using spreadsheets and Visual Basic for Application for solution. Presenting results using word processing, tables, and graphs. Introduction to engineering economics and statics. Civil engineering examples."Fundamental graphics. Introduction to computer aided drafting and modeling. Civil engineering applications."Engineering/managerial analysis of the economic aspects of project proposals. Alternative sources of funds; time value of money; expenditure of capital funds and methods of evaluating alternative projects. Professionalism, licensure, liability, ethics, leadership, social responsibility, creative and critical thinking, and applications/impacts of regulations in civil engineering."First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Project management, including work breakdown structures, cost estimating, scheduling, and project control. Civil engineering project life cycle, including planning, design, construction, and maintenance processes. Techniques in interpretation of contract documents, plan reading, and in estimating quantities.""Introduction to environmental problems, water quality indicators and requirements, potable water quality and quantity objectives, water sources and treatment methods; water pollution control objectives and treatment methods; survey of solid and hazardous waste management and air pollution control.""Loads, shear, moment, and deflected shape diagrams for beams and framed structures. Deformation calculations. Approximate methods. Application of consistent deformation  methods to continuous beams and frames. Application of displacement or slope deflection methods to continuous beams and frames without sway. Influence lines for determinate and indeterminate structures. Computer applications to analyze beams and frames. Validation of computer results."AISC design methods for structural steel buildings. Design of steel tension members. Design of steel members for flexure. Design of members for compression. Beam-Column member design. Introduction to steel building systems. Steel moment frames and concentrically braced frames. Design of commonly used connections in steel buildings."ACI design methods for structural concrete members. Emphasis on the analysis and design for flexure of singly reinforced and doubly reinforced sections, T-section, one-way slabs, short columns, and isolated footings. Analysis and design for shear, and serviceability. Bond, anchorage, and development of reinforcement.""An introductory course for planning urban and regional transportation systems within government. Applications and impacts of legislation, financing, four-step planning process, population trends, land use, societal impacts, public transportation, master plans and traffic impact studies. Organization and coordination of the transportation planning function.   Not available for graduation credit for students in civil engineering.""Introduction to planning, design, and operations of transportation facilities. Road user, vehicle and roadway characteristics. Technological, economic and environmental factors. Asset management, transportation planning, capacity analysis, traffic control, geometric design, traffic safety.""Introduction to geotechnical engineering and testing. Identification and classification tests, soil water systems, principles of settlement, stresses in soils, and shear strength testing; slope stability, retaining walls, bearing capacity.""The hydrologic cycle: precipitation, infiltration, runoff, evapotranspiration, groundwater, and streamflow. Hydrograph analysis, flood routing, frequency analysis and urban hydrology. Applied hydraulics including pipe and channel flow with design applications in culverts, pumping, water distribution, storm and sanitary sewer systems. Design project required.""Physical and chemical properties of bituminous, portland, and other cements; aggregate properties and blending; mix design and testing of concretes; admixtures, mixing, handling, placing and curing; principles of pavement thickness design."For Con E students only. Physical and chemical properties of portland cement and p.c. concrete. Mix design and testing of p.c. concrete."Multi-disciplinary approach to sustainable engineering and international development, sustainable development, appropriate design and engineering, feasibility analysis, international aid, business development, philosophy and politics of technology, and ethics in engineering. Engineering-based projects from problem formulation through implementation. Interactions with partner community organizations or international partners such as nongovernment organizations (NGOs). Course readings, final project/design report."Summer professional work period. Students must register for this course prior to commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.One semester maximum per academic year professional work period. Students must register for this course prior to commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Assessment of C E Curriculum and educational objectives. Assessments to be reviewed by the CE Department to incorporate potential improvements.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Legal principles affecting the determination of land boundaries, public domain survey systems. Locating sequential and simultaneous conveyances. Record research, plat preparation, and land description. Study of selected court cases.""Principles of chemical and physical phenomena applicable to the treatment of water and wastewater and natural waters; including chemical equilbria, reaction kinetics, acid-base equilibria, chemical precipitation, redox reactions, and mass transfer principles. Individual laboratory practicals and group projects required.""Fundamentals of biochemical and microbial processes applied to environmental engineering processes, role of microorganisms in wastewater treatment and bioremediation, bioenergetics and kinetics, metabolism of xenobiotic compounds, waterborne pathogens and parasites, and disinfection. Term paper and oral presentation."1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E."Physical, chemical and biological processes for the treatment of water and wastewater including coagulation and flocculation, sedimentation, filtration, adsorption, chemical oxidation/disinfection, fixed film and suspended growth biological processes and sludge management.""Behavior and design of clay and concrete masonry beams, columns, walls, and structural systems. Behavior and design of timber and laminated timber beams, columns, connections, and structural systems.""Sustainability, cleaner production. Taxonomy, kinetics, metabolism, microbial cultivation, aerobic and anaerobic fermentation. Antibiotics, food supplements, fermented foods, vitamin production. Biofuels, bioenergy and coproducts. Mass/energy balances, process integration, pretreatment, separation. Membrane reactors, bioelectrolysis, microbial fuel cells, nanotechnology, genetic engineering, mutagenesis."Bridge design in structural steel and reinforced concrete. Application of AASHTO Bridge Design Specifications. Analysis techniques for complex structures. Preliminary designs include investigating alternative structural systems and materials. Final designs include preparation of design calculations and sketches.Building design in structural steel and reinforced concrete. Investigation of structural behavior. Gravity and lateral load resisting systems. Application of current building codes and design specifications. In-depth analysis of gravity and wind loads on buildings. Review of building designs. Preliminary designs include investigating alternative structural systems. Approximate methods of structural analysis for gravity and lateral loads. Final designs include preparation of design calculations and sketches."Introductory and advanced topics in structural health monitoring (SHM) of aeronautical, civil, and mechanical systems. Topics include sensors, signal processing in time and frequency domains, data acquisition and transmission systems, design of integrated SHM solutions, nodestructive evaluation techniques, feature extraction methods, and cutting edge research in the field of SHM. Graduate students will have a supervisory role to assist students in 449 and an additional design project or more in-depth analysis and design.""Urban transportation planning context and process. Project planning and programming. Congestion, mitigation, and air quality issues. Transportation data sources. Travel demand and network modeling. Use of popular travel demand software and applications of geographic information systems.""Introduction to highway planning and design. Design, construction, and maintenance of highway facilities. Level-of-service, stopping sight distance, highway alignment, earthwork and pavement design. Design project, oral reports and written reports. Computer applications.""Fundamentals of foundation engineering. Exploration, sampling, and in-situ tests. Shallow and deep foundations. Settlement and bearing capacity analyses. Stability of excavations and earth retaining structures.""Soil and aggregate physical, chemical and biological  stabilization procedures. Stabilization analysis and design.  Ground modification and compaction methods.  Geosynthetics application and design.""Principles of groundwater flow, hydraulics of wells, superposition, slug and pumping tests, streamlines and flownets, and regional groundwater flow. Contaminant transport. Computer modeling. Design project. Extra assignments required for graduate students.""Analysis, behavior, performance, and structural design of pavement systems. Topics include climate factors, rehabilitation, life cycle design economics, material and system response, pavement foundations and traffic loadings. Development of models for and analysis of pavement systems. Use of transfer functions relating pavement response to pavement performance. Evaluation and application of current and evolving pavement design practices and procedures. Mechanistic-based pavement design techniques and concepts. Analysis of the effects of maintenance activities on pavement performance and economic evaluation of pavement systems.""Asphalt binder characterization, fundamentals of asphalt rheology, asphalt materials behavior under loading and temperature effects.  High-strength, light-weight, fiber-reinforced, and self-consolidating portland cement concretes, mix design, properties, advanced performance testing. A term project is required for graduate level only.""The civil engineering design process, interacting with the client, identification of the engineering problems, development of a technical proposal, identification of design criteria, cost estimating, planning and scheduling, codes and standards, development of feasible alternatives, selection of best alternative, and oral presentation.""Sustainable planning, life cycle analysis, appropriate engineering design, and overall rating assessment of horizontal civil infrastructure (i.e., versus Ì¢‰âÂèÏvertical buildingÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢) systems, including highway, bridge, airport, rail, and port facilities. Course readings and final project/design report."Independent study in any phase of civil engineering. Pre-enrollment contract required.   No more than 6 credits of C E 490 may be counted towards engineering topics electives.Independent study in any phase of civil engineering. Pre-enrollment contract required.   No more than 6 credits of C E 490H may be counted towards engineering topics electives.Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Application of engineering and management control techniques to construction project development from conceptualization to notice to proceed. Emphasis is on managing complex projects using 5-dimensional project management theory."Application of engineering and management control techniques to complex construction projects. Construction project control techniques, stochastic estimating and scheduling, equipment selection and utilization, project administration, construction process simulation, Quality Management, and productivity improvement programs.""Fundamental theories and applied methods for financial management of construction companies. Construction accounting, cash flow analysis, financial planning and management, and risk analysis. Case studies.""Advanced design of concrete formwork and falsework systems. Design for excavation and marine construction including temporary retaining structures and cofferdams. Aggregate production operations, including blasting, crushing, and conveying systems. Rigging system design.""Study of cases involving disputes, claims, and responsibilities encountered by management in construction contract documents. Analysis of methods of resolving differences among the owner, architect, engineer, and construction contractor for a project.""Information technologies including microcomputer based systems, management information systems, automation technologies, computer-aided design, and expert systems and their application in the construction industry. Overview of systems acquisition, communications, and networking.""Principles of chemical and physical phenomena applicable to the treatment of water and wastewater and natural waters; including chemical equilbria, reaction kinetics, acid-base equilibria, chemical precipitation, redox reactions, and mass transfer principles. Individual laboratory practicals and group projects required.""Fundamentals of biochemical and microbial processes applied to environmental engineering processes, role of microorganisms in wastewater treatment and bioremediation, bioenergetics and kinetics, metabolism of xenobiotic compounds, waterborne pathogens and parasites, and disinfection. Term paper and oral presentation.""Fundamentals of biochemical processes, aerobic growth in a single CSTR, multiple events in complex systems, and techniques for evaluating kinetic parameters; unit processes of activated sludge system, attached growth systems, stabilization and aerated lagoon systems, biosolids digestion and disposal, nutrient removal, and anaerobic treatment systems.""Material and energy balances. Principles and design of physical-chemical unit processes; including screening, coagulation, flocculation, chemical precipitation, sedimentation, filtration, lime softening and stabilization, oxidation, adsorption, membrane processes, ion exchange and disinfection; recovery of resources from residuals and sludges; laboratory exercises and demonstrations; case studies in mineral processing and secondary industries."1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E."Evaluation, characterization, assessment, planning and design of solid and hazardous waste management systems, regulatory requirements, material characterization and collection, minimization and recycling, energy and materials recovery, composting, off-gas treatment, incineration, stabilization, and landfill design. Design of treatment and disposal systems, including physical, chemical, and biological treatment, solidification, incineration, secure landfill design, and final disposal site closure plus restoration.""Analysis of indeterminate structural problems by the consistent deformation and generalized direct displacement methods. Direct stiffness method for 2-D frames, grids, 3-D frames. Special topics for the stiffness method.""Theoretical background and development of AISC Specification equations. In-depth analysis and design of tension members, columns, beams, beam-columns, and plate girders. Emphasis on Load and Resistance Factor Design. Elastic and inelastic buckling of members and member elements. Investigation of amplification factors for members subject to combined bending and axial load and to combined bending and torsion. Effective Length Method and Direct Analysis Method of design. Approximate Second-Order Analysis. Biaxial bending. Torsion and combined bendin and torsion of W-shapes.""Advanced topics in reinforced concrete analysis and design. Moment-curvature and load-deflection behavior. Design of reinforced concrete long columns, two-way floor slabs, and isolated and combined footings. Design and behavior considerations for torsion, biaxial bending, and structural joints. Strut-and-tie modeling.""Design of prestressed concrete structures, review of hardware, stress calculations, prestress losses, section proportioning, flexural design, shear design, deflections, and statically indeterminate structures.""Behavior and design of clay and concrete masonry beams, columns, walls, and structural systems. Behavior and design of timber and laminated timber beams, columns, connections, and structural systems.""Sustainability, cleaner production. Taxonomy, kinetics, metabolism, microbial cultivation, aerobic and anaerobic fermentation. Antibiotics, food supplements, fermented foods, vitamin production. Biofuels, bioenergy and coproducts. Mass/energy balances, process integration, pretreatment, separation. Membrane reactors, bioelectrolysis, microbial fuel cells, nanotechnology, genetic engineering, mutagenesis."Single and multi-degree-of-freedom systems. Free and forced vibrations. Linear and nonlinear response. Modal analysis. Response spectra. Seismic analysis."Use of the finite element method for the analysis of complex structural configurations. Plane stress, solid, Axisymmetric and plate elements. Numerical integration. Use of general purpose finite element programs."Seismic hazard in the United States. Engineering characteristics of ground motions. Structural damage in past earthquakes. Capacity design philosophy for seismic resistant design. Conceptual design of structures. Capacity design process including design of structural members.Bridge design in structural steel and reinforced concrete. Application of AASHTO Bridge Design Specifications. Analysis techniques for complex structures. Preliminary designs include investigating alternative structural systems and materials. Final designs include preparation of design calculations and sketches.Bending and buckling of thin plate components in structures utilizing classical and energy methods. Analysis of shell roofs by membrane and bending theories.Building design in structural steel and reinforced concrete. Investigation of structural behavior. Gravity and lateral load resisting systems. Application of current building codes and design specifications. In-depth analysis of gravity and wind loads on buildings. Review of building designs. Preliminary designs include investigating alternative structural systems. Approximate methods of structural analysis for gravity and lateral loads. Final designs include preparation of design calculations and sketches."Introductory and advanced topics in structural health monitoring (SHM) of aeronautical, civil, and mechanical systems. Topics include sensors, signal processing in time and frequency domains, data acquisition and transmission systems, design of integrated SHM solutions, nodestructive evaluation techniques, feature extraction methods, and cutting edge research in the field of SHM. Graduate students will have a supervisory role to assist students in 449 and an additional design project or more in-depth analysis and design.""Urban transportation planning context and process. Project planning and programming. Congestion, mitigation, and air quality issues. Transportation data sources. Travel demand and network modeling. Use of popular travel demand software and applications of geographic information systems.""Engineering aspects of highway traffic safety. Reduction of crash incidence and severity through highway design and traffic control. Accident analysis. Safety in highway design, maintenance, and operation.""Driver, pedestrian, and vehicular characteristics. Traffic characteristics; highway capacity; traffic studies and analyses. Principles of traffic control for improved highway traffic service. Application of appropriate computing software and tools.""Analysis of transportation data, identification of data sources and limitations. Static and dynamic data elements such as infrastructure characteristics, flow and operations-related data elements. Spatial and temporal extents data for planning, design, operations, and management of transportation systems. Summarizing, analyzing, modeling, and interpreting data. Use of information technologies for highways, transit, and aviation systems.""Travel studies and analysis of data. Transportation systems forecasts and analyses. Statewide, regional, and local transportation system planning. Network level systems planning and operations. Optimization of systems.""Study of designated problems in traffic engineering, transportation planning, and development. Forecasting and evaluation of social, economic, and environmental impacts of proposed solutions; considerations of alternatives. Formulation of recommendations and publication of a report. Presentation of recommendations in the host community.""Engineering management techniques for maintaining and managing infrastructure assets. Systematic approach to management through value engineering, engineering economics, and life cycle cost analysis. Selection and scheduling of maintenance activities. Analysis of network-wide resource needs. Project level analysis.""Nature of soil deposits, seepage, settlement and secondary compression, consolidation theories and analysis, failure theories, stress paths, introduction to critical state soil mechanics, constitutive models, soil strength under various drainage conditions, liquefaction of soil, pore pressure parameters, selection of soil parameters.""Analysis and design of shallow and deep foundations, lateral earth pressure theories and retaining structures, field investigations, in-situ testing, and foundations on problematic soils. Foundation engineering reports.""Identification and mapping of engineering soils from airphotos, maps, and soil surveys. Planning subsurface investigations, geomaterials prospecting, geotechnical hazards, geomorphology, in situ testing and sampling, geophysical site characterization, instrumentation and monitoring, interpretation of engineering parameter values for design.""Principles of geo-engineering laboratory testing including the conduct, analysis, and interpretation of permeability, consolidation, triaxial, direct and ring shear, and direct simple shear tests. Issues regarding laboratory testing versus field testing and acquisition, transport, storage, and preparation of samples for geotechnical testing. Field and laboratory geotechnical monitoring techniques, including the measurements of deformation, strain, total stress and pore water pressure.""Application of numerical methods to analysis and design of foundations, underground structures, and soil-structure interaction. Application of slope stability software. Layered soils, bearing capacity and settlement for complex geometries, wave equation for piles, and foundation vibrations.""Atoms and molecules, crystal chemistry, clay minerals, structure of solids, phase transformations and phase equilibria. Surfaces and interfacial phenomena, colloid chemistry, mechanical properties. Applications to soils and civil engineering materials. Overview of state-of-the-art instrumental techniques for analysis of the physicochemical properties of soils and civil engineering materials.""Soil and aggregate physical, chemical and biological  stabilization procedures. Stabilization analysis and design.  Ground modification and compaction methods.  Geosynthetics application and design.""Dynamic soil properties and their measurement.  Foundation dynamics and soil-structure interaction.  Sources and characteristics of dynamic loads.  Vibration of single- and multi-degree-of-freedom systems.  Vibration of continuous systems;  1D, 2D, and 3D analyses, wave propagation. Liquefaction concepts and analysis methods.  Introduction to geotechnical earthquake engineering.""Classification of ground improvement methods. Dynamic compaction, vibrocompaction, preloading using fill surcharge, vacuum or a combination of both and prefabricated vertical drains, vibro replacement or stone columns, dynamic replacement, sand compaction piles, geotextile confined columns, rigid inclusion, column supported embankment, microbial methods, particulate and chemical grouting, lime and cement columns, jet grouting, and deep cement mixing.""Flow characteristics in natural and constructed channels; principles of hydraulic design of culverts, bridge waterway openings, spillways, hydraulic gates and gated structures, pumping stations, and miscellaneous water control structures; pipe networks, mathematical modeling. Design project.""Analysis of hydrologic data including precipitation, infiltration, evapotranspiration, direct runoff and streamflow; theory and use of frequency analysis; theory of streamflow and reservoir routing; use of deterministic and statistical hydrologic models. Fundamentals of surface water quality modeling, point and non-point sources of contamination. Design project.""Principles of surface water flows and mixing. Introduction to hydrologic transport and water   quality simulation in natural water systems. Advection, diffusion and dispersion, chemical and   biologic kinetics, and water quality dynamics. Applications to temperature, dissolved oxygen,   primary productivity, and other water quality problems in rivers, lakes and reservoirs.   Deterministic vs. stochastic models.""Principles of groundwater flow, hydraulics of wells, superposition, slug and pumping tests, streamlines and flownets, and regional groundwater flow. Contaminant transport. Computer modeling. Design project. Extra assignments required for graduate students.""Analysis and applications of flows in civil engineering, environmental engineering, and water resources. Primary topics include conservation laws, laminar flow, turbulence, mixing, diffusion, dispersion, water waves, and boundary layers. Associated applications include particle settling, transfer at air-water and water-sediment boundaries, flow and friction in pipes and open channels, contaminant transport, waves in lakes, jets, plumes, and salt wedges."(1-0) Students and outside/invited speakers give weekly presentations about the ongoing research work and Geotechnical and Materials Engineering issues.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Analysis, behavior, performance, and structural design of pavement systems. Topics include climate factors, rehabilitation, life cycle design economics, material and system response, pavement foundations and traffic loadings. Development of models for and analysis of pavement systems. Use of transfer functions relating pavement response to pavement performance. Evaluation and application of current and evolving pavement design practices and procedures. Mechanistic-based pavement design techniques and concepts. Analysis of the effects of maintenance activities on pavement performance and economic evaluation of pavement systems.""Asphalt binder characterization, fundamentals of asphalt rheology, asphalt materials behavior under loading and temperature effects.  High-strength, light-weight, fiber-reinforced, and self-consolidating portland cement concretes, mix design, properties, advanced performance testing. A term project is required for graduate level only.""Advanced asphalt concrete (SUPERPAVE) mix designs. Aggregates. Admixtures. Production and construction, quality control and inspection. Nondestructive testing. Pavement thickness design. Materials engineering reports.""Hydraulic cements, aggregates, admixtures, and mix design; concrete production, quality control, early-age properties and durability. Concrete distress examination, identification, prevention, and nondestructive testing; advanced concrete technology, high-strength and high performance concrete.""Sustainable planning, life cycle analysis, appropriate engineering design, and overall rating assessment of horizontal civil infrastructure (i.e., versus Ì¢‰âÂèÏvertical buildingÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢) systems, including highway, bridge, airport, rail, and port facilities. Course readings and final project/design report."Pre-enrollment contract required.(1-0) Contemporary environmental engineering issues. Outside speakers. Review of ongoing research in environmental engineering.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Some topics have a set number of credits and some topics have the number of credits vary. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:."Assigned readings and reports on research methods to solve construction engineering and management problems such as alternative project delivery methods, asset management, data mining, construction procurement, robotics, project controls, automation, construction visualization, etc. Identification of research methods and priorities, selection and development of research design, and critique of research in construction engineering and management."Assigned readings and reports on research methods to assess and solve qualitative construction engineering and management problems.Assigned readings and reports on research methods to assess and solve quantitative construction engineering and management problems.Assigned readings and reports on research methods for planning and preparation of technical reports with construction engineering and management projects.Pre-enrollment contract required. Advanced topic for creative component report in lieu of thesis.Advanced concepts in environmental engineering. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Advanced concepts in environmental engineering. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Advanced concepts in environmental engineering. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Advanced concepts in environmental engineering. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Advanced concepts in environmental engineering. Emphasis for a particular offering will be selected from the following topics:.Advanced concepts in environmental engineering.Pre-enrollment contract required.One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Advanced topic for thesis/dissertation.Essential vocabulary and concepts in English that are derived from Latin and Ancient Greek.  Formation and usage of technical terminology.  Cultural influence of the classical languages.  Analysis of technical writing."Survey of the legends, myths of the classical world with emphasis on the principal gods, and heroes, and their relation to ancient social, psychological, and religious practices; some attention may be given to important modern theories.""Survey of the legends, myths of the classical world with emphasis on the principal gods, and heroes, and their relation to ancient social, psychological, and religious practices; some attention may be given to important modern theories.""Examination of ancient urban life, including historical context, physical space, material culture, religion, literature, and art; examination of civic identity (the ""polis""). Contrast between the concepts of urban and rural. Examples drawn from specific ancient cities; some attention to modern methods of recovering the conditions of ancient urban life and the fundamental concept of the city in European history.""Examination of ancient urban life, including historical context, physical space, material culture, religion, literature, and art; examination of civic identity (the ""polis""). Contrast between the concepts of urban and rural. Examples drawn from specific ancient cities; some attention to modern methods of recovering the conditions of ancient urban life and the fundamental concept of the city in European history.""Historical examination of art, literature, thought, and religious beliefs of major civilizations of the ancient Mediterranean countries until the end of the 8th century.""Survey of ancient Greek philosophy, focusing on the pre-Socratics, Plato, and Aristotle. Questions concerning being, knowledge, language, and the good life are treated in depth.""Ideas about the relationship between rhetoric and society in contemporary and historical contexts. An exploration of classical and contemporary rhetorical theories in relation to selected topics that may include politics, gender, race, ethics, education, science, or technology.""Representative works from the drama, epics, poetry, and prose of the Ancient World through the late sixteenth century. May include Homer, Aeschylus, Sappho, Catullus, Dante, Marie de France, Boccaccio, Christine de Pizan, Cervantes, and others.""An historical introduction to the rise of Christianity in the Roman empire, with special attention to the impact of Greco-Roman culture on the thought and practice of Christians and the interaction of early Christians with their contemporaries.""Greek and Roman drama from the beginnings until today. Readings in English from authors such as Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, Menander, Plautus, Terence, Seneca. Course may cover performance, theories of comedy and tragedy, recent and current expressions of the comic and tragic in film and other media.""Greek and Roman drama from the beginnings until today. Readings in English from authors such as Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, Menander, Plautus, Terence, Seneca. Course may cover performance, theories of comedy and tragedy, recent and current expressions of the comic and tragic in film and other media.""Cultural and political significance of ancient epic, especially in Greece and Rome. Course may include study of the heroic code in antiquity and its modern expressions including in film. Readings in English from authors such as Homer and Vergil.""Cultural and political significance of ancient epic, especially in Greece and Rome. Course may include study of the heroic code in antiquity and its modern expressions including in film. Readings in English from authors such as Homer and Vergil.""Chronological and topical survey of the status of women and men, focusing on sex and gender issues in the Ancient Mediterranean world; study of constructs of the female and the feminine. Readings from ancient and modern sources.  Emphasis on ancient Greece, Rome, and Egypt.""Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Greece-Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Greek or Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored.""Bronze Age (Minoan and Mycenaean palatial cultures) and Early Iron Age Greece. (ca 3000-700 BCE). Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Greece-Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Greek or Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored.""Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Greece-Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Greek or Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored.""Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored."Greek art from Neolithic to Hellenistic periods. Roman art from the traditional founding to the end of the empire in the West.Greek art from Neolithic to Hellenistic periods. Roman art from the traditional founding to the end of the empire in the West."Introduction to the topography, history, archaeology, monuments, and art of Rome from the Regal period through late Antiquity; attention given to the culture of modern Italy, preparatory to study abroad in Rome.""Supervised on-site instruction in the history, archaeology, monuments, and art of Rome and environs from the 8th center BCE to the 5th century CE; attention given to the culture of modern Italy.""Introduction to the topography, history, archaeology, monuments and art of Greece from the Bronze Age through the Ottoman period; attention given to the culture of modern Greece, preparatory to study abroad in Greece (CL ST 395).""Supervised on-site instruction in the archaeology, monuments, and art of Greece from the Bronze Age through the Ottoman period; attention given to the culture of modern Greece.""Ancient Greece from the Bronze Age to the Hellenistic period; evolution of the Greek polis and its   cultural contributions, with a particular emphasis on the writings of Herodotus and Thucydides."Ancient Rome from the Regal Period to the fall of the Western Empire; evolution of Roman institutions and Rome's cultural contributions studied through original sources."Study of original texts in political thought ranging from the classical period to the renaissance. Topics such as justice, freedom, virtue, the allocation of political power, the meaning of democracy, human nature, and natural law."Advanced study of a selected topic in Classical Studies. Research paper or project selected by the student."Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study specific topics in classical civilization in areas where courses are not offered, or to pursue such study beyond the limits of existing courses."Readings in European history.Readings in European history.Greek art from Neolithic and Hellenistic periods. Roman art from the traditional founding to the end of the empire in the West.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered."Survey of nature, causes, and types of major communication disorders including phonological, adult and child language, voice, cleft palate, fluency, and hearing disorders.""Learn to communicate with the deaf using Signed English and Signed Pidgin English.  Other topics covered include types, causes, and consequences of hearing loss, hearing technology (hearing aids, assistive listening devices, and cochlear implants), education of hearing-impaired children, Deaf culture, and the history of manual communication.""Analysis of speech through study of individual sounds, their variations, and relationships in context; English phonology; practice in auditory discrimination and transcription of sounds of American English; description of speech sounds in terms of their production, transmission, and perception.""Theories and developmental processes related to the components of language(semantics, syntax, morphology, phonology, and pragmatics); the development of metalinguistic knowledge; theories and developmental processes of reading."Guided examination of topics in preparation for graduate work in Speech-Language Pathology or Audiology. Primary course delivery by WWW.Guided examination of topics in preparation for graduate work in Speech-Language Pathology or Audiology. Primary course delivery by WWW.Guided examination of topics in preparation for graduate work in Speech-Language Pathology or Audiology. Primary course delivery by WWW.Guided examination of topics in preparation for graduate work in Speech-Language Pathology or Audiology. Primary course delivery by WWW."An introduction to communication theory, the development and functions of communication, and a survey of verbal, nonverbal, interpersonal, small group, organizational, and intercultural communication.""Laboratory component of COMST 101. Skill building, experiential activities,  and in-depth discussions relevant to the study of communication.""Application of communication principles, theory, and research to the process of interpersonal communication; includes verbal and nonverbal communication, listening, and conflict management. Particular emphasis given to using communication to manage interpersonal relationships.""Orientation to Communication Studies discipline, program requirements and career opportunities. Required of communication studies majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."An introduction to analyzing and conducting communication research. Provides an overview of quantitative and qualitative approaches to communication research."Communication theory and skill development in organizational settings. Emphasis on interpersonal skill development, team and meeting facilitation, informational interviewing, individual and team presentations, and self-assessment.""Exploration of communication theories, principles and methods associated with effective conflict management.""Examination of the major theories related to human communication;  with particular emphasis on theories underlying interpersonal, small group, organizational, and intercultural communication.""Examines the theories, principles and research on intercultural communication to enhance cultural sensitivity and to recognize, accept, and adapt to cultural diversity. Interactive assignments."This class focuses on studies of contemporary interpersonal communication concepts and theories. Emphasis on research that examines issues central to communication in interpersonal relationships."Investigation of theories, research and principles of leadership communication. Exploration of the contexts in which leadership and communication occurs, with emphasis on the connection between communication and leadership and the dyadic linkage of leader and follower.""Theory and research in organizational communication. Provides strategies for assessing and improving individual and organizational communication effectiveness. Addresses issues such as technology, diversity, work-life negotiation, emotional labor, conflict, socialization, and socially responsible organizations. Explores how organizational meaning is created and sustained through human communication."Theory and research in small group communication; application to group decision-making and leadership. Includes communication analyses of groups and teams."Theories and approaches to communication training and development; includes adult learning theory. Emphasis on the design, presentation and assessment of communication skills in organizational contexts.""Approaches to studying nonverbal communication. Foci include topics such as emotion, gestures, gaze, use of space, and parsing intention in social interaction."Theories and approaches related to mediated communication in interpersonal and organizational settings. Focus on how new technology impacts human interaction and relationships."Theory and research of micro-level organizational communication, including interpersonal and small group interactions taking place in a professional setting. Topics include interpersonal dynamics in such areas as conflict, generational communication, negotiation, superior/subordinate communication, external communication, and virtual communication. Not available for major credit."Capstone communication studies course. Students develop an original research study linked to the study of communication. Data are collected and analyzed. Results are presented in a final research paper and a presentation.Research and theory related to special topics and issues in communication studies.Application must be submitted for approval the semester prior to the independent study.Providing research assistance on projects conducted by Communication Studies faculty.100 hours of on-site professional work per credit hour plus completion of the academic requirement set by the internship committee. Application should be submitted in the term prior to the term in which the internship will be served. Internship cannot be used to meet degree requirement in Communication Studies.Capstone communication studies course. Students develop an original research study linked to the study of communication. Data are collected and analyzed. Results are presented in a final research paper and a presentation.Application must be submitted for approval the semester prior to the independent study.Examination of the evolution of American urban centers from the colonial era to the present. Considers the demographic changes and social movements underway in urban America and explores how an understanding of the history of cities provides us with knowledge that we can use to improve our cities today."World cities and globalization in developed and developing countries. Topics include globalization, world cities and regions, uneven economic development, the international division of labor, multinational corporations, international environmentalism, tourism, popular culture and place- based identity.""Comprehensive overview of the field of environmental relationships and the efforts being made to organize, control, and coordinate environmental, aesthetic, and cultural characteristics of land, air, and water.""An introduction to the methods and analytical techniques used by planners to study community change.  Course includes identification of key sources of planning information and data.  Students learn to use quantitative methods for analysis of population, land use, economic and transportation data.  Students learn to apply basic analytic methods to community problems and learn the art of effective written, graphic, and oral presentation of data.""An introduction to urban geography. Study of urban centers, including people and infrastructure. Investigation of the origin and evolution of urban areas and the processes that shape urban change. Topics include urban form, and the social, economic, political, cultural, and institutional factors that shape cities.""Structured work experience under close supervision of a professional planner. Practical planning experience; relationships between theory and practice, professional responsibilities, and the scope of various planning roles.""Firm location with respect to regional resources, transport, scale economies, externalities, and policies. Measures of local comparative advantage and specialization. Spatial markets. Population location considering jobs, wages, commuting, and local amenities. Business, residential, and farm land use and value. Migration. Other topics may include market failure, regulation, the product cycle, theories of rural and urban development, developmental policy, firm recruiting, local public goods and public finance, schools, poverty, segregation, and crime.""The nature of planning and its relation to social and economic planning; levels of planning, place of planning in decision making; steps in the planning process, uses and limitation of knowledge in planning, relation of facts and values."Observation of professional practice and community or regional problems and issues.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Approved professional work experience.Principles of urban design and their application to residential and commercial development in studio projects."Planning methods available to further revitalization and preservation efforts, with particular attention to housing and neighborhoods. Relationship between neighborhood change and urban development process; public policy implications.""Introduction to issues in planning and governance in an international setting. Problems and strategies may include population movement and change, economic globalization, urban growth, rural development, and housing."Integration of planning methods and theory in dealing with a community planning problem. Analysis of problem and formulation of strategies for implementation. Preparation of a community planning report.Contemporary planning problems in small towns and the design of viable strategies to enhance their social and economic position in today's society.The nature and process of economic development in the context of community development. Recent changes and trends and their implications for local and regional development. Selected case studies and applications. Contemporary community economic development issues."Introduction to site development including site review. Studio project integrating concept, finance, selection, analysis, and design.""Comprehensive overview of key policy issues related to transportation planning and investment in the United States and abroad. Policy issues explored include safety, environmental impact, sustainable communities, and economic development. Policy analysis and planning are studied in conjunction with each policy issue explored. Issues of concern to state, metropolitan, and local governments.""Introduction to geographic information systems, including discussions of GIS hardware, software, data structures, data acquisition, data conversion, data presentation, analytical techniques, and implementation procedures. Laboratory emphasizes practical applications and uses of GIS.""Extensive coverage of geo-relational database concept and design, GIS database creation and maintenance, geographic data manipulation and analysis. GIS output generation and geographic data presentation. Laboratory emphasizes practical applications and uses of GIS.""Introduction to automated geoprocessing in Geographic Information Systems.  Focus on learning scripting language and object-oriented programming, automation of custom-designed geoprocessing scripts, and application toward student research and/or interests.""A short introduction to effective grant writing for the public and non-profit sectors. Includes identifying appropriate funding sources for an organization, identifying goals and objectives, and budgeting."The history and theory of sustainable community planning.  Procedural and substantive dimensions.  Case studies of communities engaged in sustainability planning.  Use and development of indicators.Investigation of an approved topic commensurate with student's interest and ability.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Investigation of an approved topic commensurate with student's interest and ability.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Environmental law and policy as applied in planning at the local and state levels. Brownfields, environmental justice, water quality, air quality, wetland and floodplain management, and local government involvement in ecological protection through land use planning and other programs.""The basis in constitutional, common, and statutory law for the powers of plan implementation. Problems of balancing public and private interests as revealed in the study of leading court cases. Administration of planning agencies and programs."An advanced forum for seniors that focuses upon recent trends and important issues affecting planning today. Topics addressed will vary. A demonstration of understanding of current issues and their effects upon planning applications is expected.Should be taken in the final semester of the planning program. Preparation of a portfolio of student work that represents student learning throughout the entire planning program.Approved professional work experience.Principles of urban design and their application to residential and commercial development in studio projects."Planning methods available to further revitalization and preservation efforts, with particular attention to housing and neighborhoods. Relationship between neighborhood change and urban development process; public policy implications."Introduction to basic academic writings on Middle Eastern cities in addition to other contemporary cultural productions of the region. Study of various aspects of Middle Eastern life and the built environments that this life produces."Introduction to issues in planning and governance in an international setting. Problems and strategies may include population movement and change, economic globalization, urban growth, rural development, and housing.""Practical planning experience. Structured work in range of tasks under close supervision of a professional planner. Relationships between theory and practice, exposure to variety of roles in functioning specialties.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Comprehension and analysis of various geographic contexts pertinent to community planning and the use of planning theory, tools and techniques in an applied setting. Process of making a community plan: historical patterns, current conditions and strategies for planning."Contemporary planning problems in small towns and the design of viable strategies to enhance their social and economic position in today's society.The nature and process of economic development in the context of community development. Recent changes and trends and their implications for local and regional development. Selected case studies and applications. Contemporary community economic development issues."Introduction to site development including site review. Studio project integrating concept, finance, selection, analysis, and design.""Comprehensive overview of key policy issues related to transportation planning and investment in the United States and abroad. Policy issues explored include safety, environmental impact, sustainable communities, and economic development. Policy analysis and planning are studied in conjunction with each policy issue explored. Issues of concern to state, metropolitan, and local governments.""Introduction to geographic information systems, including discussions of GIS hardware, software, data structures, data acquisition, data conversion, data presentation, analytical techniques, and implementation procedures. Laboratory emphasizes practical applications and uses of GIS.""Extensive coverage of geo-relational database concept and design, GIS database creation and maintenance, geographic data manipulation and analysis. GIS output generation and geographic data presentation. Laboratory emphasizes practical applications and uses of GIS.""Integration of exploratory, participatory and predictive spatial analyses and 3D visualization into the planning process. GIS tools and techniques are used to automate decision analysis and facilitate future planning in analyzing and visualizing planning actions. Laboratory emphasizes practical uses of GIS tools and techniques.""Introduction to automated geoprocessing in Geographic Information Systems.  Focus on learning scripting language and object-oriented programming, automation of custom-designed geoprocessing scripts, and application toward student research and/or interests.""Use and development of theory/action relationship in planning practice. Competing normative theories of planning and their evolution, key components and fundamental critiques. Exploration of planning frameworks and approaches, including comprehensive planning; incrementalism; advocacy; communicative rationality; and others.""Focus on the historical role of planning in the shaping of American cities and regions, from the beginning of the Republic to the present. Examine the legacy of planning by exploring the intersection of design, politics and policy. Investigate the factors and the processes that produce the built environment.""Applications of analytical methods in planning with emphasis on the collection, description, analysis, presentation, and interpretation of planning data. Introduction to descriptive statistics. Sources of planning information and data including primary and secondary data types and sources. Demographic analysis, population projection techniques for planning at local and regional levels.""Principles and methods for analyzing communities and regions as social political, economic, and ecological systems. Exploration of relationships between individuals and institutions, the economy and governance. Examination of social values and their manifestation in decision making methods used in planning. Application of decision making tools for planning problems involving economic analysis, power relations, environmental impacts and social impacts. Project evlauation methods.""Exploration and evaluation of the techniques, processes, and professional skills required to effectively manage land use change at various scales. Land classification systems; land supply and needs inventory for residential uses and commercial and employment centers; capacity and needs analysis for public infrastructure. Includes land use planning project(s) designed to apply the methods explored in this and other courses.""A short introduction to effective grant writing for the public and non-profit sectors. Includes identifying appropriate funding sources for an organization, identifying goals and objectives, and budgeting."The history and theory of sustainable community planning.  Procedural and substantive dimensions.  Case studies of communities engaged in sustainability planning.  Use and development of indicators."Environmental law and policy as applied in planning at the local and state levels. Brownfields, environmental justice, water quality, air quality, wetland and floodplain management, and local government involvement in ecological protection through land use planning and other programs."An in-depth analysis of the legal constructs that shape the practice of planning and plan implementation in the United States.  An exploration of how land use regulations are applied to reconcile the competing needs and diverse uses of land.  The positive and negative consequences of developing and implementing regulatory controls will be addressed.Discussion and demonstration of current GIS applications and research in multiple disciplines.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Independent planning project with practical application, including research element."Synthesis and integration of core planning knowledge into professional work in a team setting."Detailed introduction to community resource management.  Theoretical frameworks, methodological investigation, applied practices.  Enhancement of ability of community development professionals to work with communities to plan, develop and monitor conversation and development of natural resources with multiple functions.""Analysis of principles and practices of community change and development. Use of case studies to relate community development approaches to conceptual models from diverse disciplines.  Exploration of professional practice principles, and student construction of their personal framework for practicing community development.""Introduction to research methods relevant to community development. Formulate and begin a research effort, methods of data collection and how conceptual frameworks are used to develop the questions and analyze data. Emphasis on strategies for reporting findings and applying findings in community action and methods of evaluating the entire research process. Significant attention paid to issues of research ethics and inclusiveness.""Examines role of civil society in community planning efforts. Comparative approach to planning theories and approaches. Focus on change within communities and the roles of government, planners, and citizens in reacting to or shaping change. Dimensions of social capital and the context of change covered.""Introduction to concepts of communities and regions, theories of economic growth, drivers of economic growth, the economic base of a community, sources of growth or decline in the community, roles of local government and institutions, and analytical tools. Strategies for local economic development will also be explored.""A base knowledge course. For students currently working within, in partnership with, or considering working with Native communities. Basic understanding within the context of community development of the diversity of the tribal structures and cultures and the unique history and jurisdictional considerations of these nations.  Working with tribes, Federal and Indian relations, and governance and cultural issues.""Approaches economy and community by looking at the inherent interdependence, jointness, and potential complimentarity between ecology and economy (utility) of a place.""Focus on non-western approaches to helping Native communities build their capacity. Students will learn to take a participatory, culture-centered, and strength-based approach to development.""Introduction to the historical and contemporary issues related to natural resource management on Native American lands.   Philosophical and economic arguments concerning natural resource conservation, preservation and extraction will be explored.""Students will learn the conceptual relationships among Community and Sustainable Development and Sustainable Communities and examine the social, environmental, and economic aspects of sustainable communities. The course includes analysis of public policy impacts on community sustainability, practical actions for enhancing sustainability, and changing power dynamics and reward structures involved in incorporating sustainability into Community Development.""Course explores theories of local economic development and addresses the development issues faced by communities in the 21st century. Students will understand and apply concepts from economic development planning, economic analysis, business development, human resource development, community-based development, and high-technology development.""Introduction to the Community Development program.  Focus on on-line delivery methods, graduate level research and writing, technology skills.""Review and evaluation of historical and current housing issues, production, and financial systems, including consideration of racial, ethnic, income, and gender issues as they relate to the role of housing developments and programs in community development."Defining leadership and applying it to the workplace. Understanding of potential link between leadership and community capacity. Identifying strategies for leadership development in communities."Basic Grant Development and Management will introduce students to the grant-getting process and provide an overview of what happens after a project is funded. The following topics will be covered: researching funding sources, generating cutting edge ideas, assessing needs, planning a project, establishing credibility, formulating a sustainable budget, designing an evaluation plan, managing the funded project, and disseminating project results.""Understanding of how non-profit organizations are run in order that they may participate more fully   in community development efforts. Learning skills necessary to assist organizations to manage   community development projects and programs, such as, budgeting, planning, personnel, facilities,   volunteer management, and fundraising."Focus on role of tribally-chartered colleges and universities in economic development within Native communities. Social capital analytic framework to examine and evaluate tribal college model of economic development."Mechanisms for community inclusion and exclusion in relation to immigration will be examined. Aspects of ethnicity, religion, occupation and transnationalism are addressed in terms of community mechanism for incorporating immigrants as community assets.""Introduction to the fundamental theories and practices of budgeting in the public and non-profit sectors. Topics covered include overview of budgeting and budget reform, taxation, expenditures, budget preparation and adoption, budget implementation, and performance budgeting.""Introduction to the philosophy, techniques, and methodologies of organizational and program evaluation. Overview of program evaluation and theory, techniques to evaluate program processes and performance, evaluation designs, assessing program efficiency, models to diagnose organizations, and methods to assess organizational performance."Understanding what ethics are and identify ethical dimensions of a problem. Ability to employ ethical analysis and engagement strategies in public problem-solving.Substantive grounding in the theories and practice of measuring community economic dynamics; build solid foundation skills for applied community economic analysis."Exploration of political implications of coastal policy. Issues include: ""Carrying capacity,"" zoning, regulation of human development activities, tradeoffs between conservation and jobs, the quality of coastal lifestyle, ways in which citizens participate in policy for coastal areas.""Special topics in Community Development. Independent Study, must get instructor approval."Students work with major professor to conduct research and carry out work on their creative component. Instructor permission required.Thesis Research."Understanding core techniques in artificial life is based on basic readings in complex adaptive systems. Techniques of complex system analysis methods including: evolutionary computation, neural nets, agent based simulations (agent based computational economics). Large-scale simulations are to be emphasized, e.g. power grids, whole ecosystems.""Survey of complex systems and their analysis. Examples are drawn from engineering, computer science, biology, economics and physics.""Basic concepts of practical computer and Internet security: passwords, firewalls, antivirus software, malware, social networking, surfing the Internet, phishing, and wireless networks. This class is intended for students with little or no background in information technology or security. Basic knowledge of word processing required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""(1-0) Overview of the nature and scope of electrical engineering and computer engineering professions. Overview of portfolios. Departmental rules, advising center operations, degree requirements, program of study planning, career options, and student organizations."Introduction to Computer Engineering. Project based examples from computer engineering. Individual interactive skills for small and large groups. Computer-based projects. Solving engineering problems and presenting solutions through technical reports. Solution of engineering problems using a programming language.Project based examples from computer engineering. Group skills needed to work effectively in teams. Group problem solving. Computer based projects. Technical reports and presentations. Students will work on 2 or 3 self-directed team based projects that are representative of problems faced by computer engineers."Introduction to the College of Engineering and the engineering profession specifically for transfer students. Information concerning university and college policies, procedures, and resources.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Number systems and representation. Boolean algebra and logic minimization. Combinational and sequential logic design.  Arithmetic circuits and finite state machines. Use of programmable logic devices. Introduction to computer-aided schematic capture systems, simulation tools, and hardware description languages. Design of simple digital systems.""Embedded C programming. Interrupt handling.  Memory mapped I/O in the context of an application.  Elementary embedded design flow/methodology.  Timers, scheduling, resource allocation, optimization, state machine based controllers, real time constraints within the context of an application.  Applications laboratory exercises with embedded devices."The roles of professionals in computer and electrical engineering.  Relationship of coursework to industry and academic careers.  Issues relevant to today's world.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Operating system concepts, processes, threads, synchronization between threads, process and thread scheduling, deadlocks, memory management, file systems, I/O systems,security, Linux-based lab experiments."Propositional logic and methods of proof; set theory and its applications; mathematical induction and recurrence relations; functions and relations; and counting; trees and graphs; applications in computer engineering.Solving computer engineering problems using algorithms.  Emphasis on problems related to the core focus areas in computer engineering.  Real world examples of algorithms used in the computer engineering domain.  Algorithm engineering.  Prototyping of algorithms."Process-based software development. Capability Maturity Model (CMM). Project planning, cost estimation, and scheduling. Project management tools. Factors influencing productivity and success. Productivity metrics. Analysis of options and risks. Version control and configuration management. Inspections and reviews. Managing the testing process. Software quality metrics. Modern software engineering techniques and practices.""Semiconductor technology for integrated circuits. Modeling of integrated devices including diodes, BJTs, and MOSFETs. Physical layout. Circuit simulation. Digital building blocks and digital circuit synthesis. Analysis and design of analog building blocks. Laboratory exercises and design projects   with CAD tools and standard cells.""Participation in cyber defense competition driven by scenario-based network design. Includes computer system setup, risk assessment and implementation of security systems, as well as defense of computer and network systems against trained attackers. Team based.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Modeling and design of software at the architectural level. Architectural styles. Basics of model-driven architecture. Object-oriented design and analysis. Iterative development and unified process. Design patterns. Design by contract. Component based design. Product families. Measurement theory and appropriate use of metrics in design. Designing for qualities such as performance, safety, security, reliability, reusability, etc. Analysis and evaluation of software architectures. Introduction to architecture definition languages. Basics of software evolution, reengineering, and reverse engineering. Case studies. Introduction to distributed system software.""A project-based, hands-on learning course. Technology literacy, appreciation for technological innovations, principles behind many technological innovations, hands-on laboratory experiences based upon simple systems constructed out of LEGOs and controlled by small microcomputers. Future K-12 teachers will leave the course with complete lesson plans for use in their upcoming careers.""Introduction to computer organization, evaluating performance of computer systems, instruction set design.  Assembly level programming:  arithmetic operations, control flow instructions, procedure calls, stack management.  Processor design.  Datapath and control, scalar pipelines, introduction to memory and I/O systems."Contemporary programming techniques for event driven systems. Mobile platforms and operating systems. Location and motion sensors based user interfaces. Threading and scheduling. Resource management - measurement and control techniques - for memory and energy. Client-server application design. Distributed applications. Laboratory includes exercises based on a mobile platform.Exploration of academic and career fields for electrical and computer engineers.  Examination of professionalism in the context of engineering and technology with competencies based skills.  Introduction to professional portfolio development and construction.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Summer professional work period.One semester maximum per academic year professional work period.Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."A study of formal techniques for model-based specification and verification of software systems. Topics include logics, formalisms, graph theory, numerical computations, algorithms and tools for automatic analysis of systems. Graduate credit requires in-Ìâå_depth study of concepts.""Practical importance of software evolution and maintenance, systematic defect analysis and debugging techniques, tracing and understanding large software, impact analysis, program migration and transformation, refactoring, tools for software evolution and maintenance, experimental studies and quantitative measurements of software evolution. Written reports and oral presentation."Measurement of high speed systems and mixed signal systems.  Measurement accuracy and error.  Network analysis and spectrum analysis used in high speed measurement and testing.  Test specification process and parametric measurement.  Sampling and digital signal processing concepts.  Design for testability.  Testing equipment. Applications."Software tools for managing and manipulating large volumes of data, external memory processing, large scale parallelism, and stream processing, data interchange formats. Weekly programming labs that involve the use of a parallel computing cluster."Numerical serial and parallel computing using the Message Passing Interface. Oral and written semester project."Introduction to high performance computing platforms including parallel computers and workstation clusters. Discussion of parallel architectures, performance, programming models, and software development issues. Sample applications from science and engineering. Practical issues in high performance computing will be emphasized via a number of programming projects using a variety of programming models and case studies. Oral and written reports.""Models of parallel computation, performance measures, basic parallel constructs and communication primitives, parallel programming using MPI, parallel algorithms for selected problems including sorting, matrix, tree and graph problems, fast Fourier transforms.""Introduction to and application of basic mechanisms for protecting information systems from accidental and intentional threats. Basic cryptography use and practice. Computer security issues including authentication, access control, and malicious code. Network security mechanisms such as intrusion detection, firewalls, IPSEC, and related protocols. Ethics and legal issues in information security. Wireless security. Programming and system configuration assignments.""Basic analog integrated circuit and system design including design space exploration, performance enhancement strategies, operational amplifiers, references, integrated filters, and data converters.""Broad overview of bioinformatics with a significant problem-solving component, including hands-on practice using computational tools to solve a variety of biological problems. Topics include: bioinformatic data processing, Perl programming, genome assembly, database search, sequence alignment, gene prediction, next-generation sequencing, comparative and functional genomics, and systems biology.""Fundamentals of distributed computing, software agents, naming services, distributed transactions, security management, distributed object-based systems, web-based systems, middleware-based application design and development, case studies of middleware and internet applications.""(3-1) Cr. 3. Theoretical and practical issues of design and implementation of distributed systems.  The client server paradigm, inter-process communications, synchronization and concurrency control, naming, consistency and replication, fault tolerance, and distributed file systems. Graduate credit requires additional in-depth study of concepts.  Programming projects and written reports.""Fundamental concepts in real-time systems. Real time task scheduling paradigms. Resource management in uniprocessor, multiprocessor, and distributed real-time systems. Fault-tolerance, resource reclaiming, and overload handling. Real-time channel, packet scheduling, and real-time LAN protocols. Case study of real-time operating systems. Laboratory experiments.""Digital design of integrated circuits employing very large scale integration (VLSI) methodologies. Technology considerations in design. High level hardware design languages, CMOS logic design styles, area-energy-delay design space characterization, datapath blocks: arithmetic and memory, architectures and systems on a chip (SOC) considerations. VLSI chip hardware design project.""Application of team design concepts to projects of a multidisciplinary nature. Concurrent treatment of design, manufacturing and life cycle considerations. Application of design tools such as CAD, CAM and FEM. Design methodologies, project scheduling, cost estimating, quality control, manufacturing processes. Development of a prototype and appropriate documentation in the form of written reports, oral presentations, computer models and engineering drawings.""Build and test of a conceptual design. Detail design, manufacturability, test criteria and procedures. Application of design tools such as CAD and CAM and manufacturing techniques such as rapid prototyping. Development and testing of a full-scale prototype with appropriate documentation in the form of design journals, written reports, oral presentations and computer models and engineering drawings.""Introduction to hardware architectures for computer graphics and their programming models. System-level view, including framebuffers, video output devices, displays, 2D and 3D graphics acceleration, and device interfacing. Architectural design of GPUs, from 2D and 3D sprite engines to 3D rendering pipelines to unified shader architectures. Computing models for graphics processors. GPGPU and GPU computing.""Embedded system design using hardware description language (HDL) and field programmable gate array (FPGA).  HDL modeling concepts and styles are introduced; focus on synthesizability, optimality, reusability and portability in hardware design description. Introduction to complex hardware cores for data buffering, data input/output interfacing, data processing. System design with HDL cores and implementation in FPGA. Laboratory-oriented design projects.""Embedded microprocessors, embedded memory and I/O devices, component interfaces, embedded software, program development, basic compiler techniques, platform-based FPGA technology, hardware synthesis, design methodology, real-time operating system concepts, performance analysis and optimizations.""Modern computer networking and data communications concepts. TCP/IP, OSI protocols, client server programming, data link protocols, local area networks, and routing protocols."Investigation of an approved topic.Investigation of an approved topic."Preparing for entry to the workplace. Selected professional topics. Use of technical writing skills in developing project plan and design report; design review presentation. First of two-semester team-oriented, project design and implementation experience."Second semester of a team design project experience. Emphasis on the successful implementation and demonstration of the design completed in E E 491 or CPR E 491 and the evaluation of project results. Technical writing of final project report; oral presentation of project achievements; project poster.Portfolio update and evaluation. Portfolios as a tool to enhance career opportunities.Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Design techniques for analog and mixed-signal VLSI circuits. Amplifiers; operational amplifiers, transconductance amplifiers, finite gain amplifiers and current amplifiers. Linear building blocks; differential amplifiers, current mirrors, references, cascading and buffering. Performance characterization of linear integrated circuits; offset, noise, sensitivity and stability. Layout considerations, simulation, yield and modeling for high-performance linear integrated circuits.""Theory, design and applications of power management and regulation circuits (Linear and switching regulators, battery chargers, and reference circuits) including: Architectures, Performance metrics and characterization, Noise and stability analysis, Practical implementation and on-chip integration issues, design considerations for portable, wireless, and RF SoCs.""Theory, design and applications of data conversion circuits (A/D and D/A converters) including: architectures, characterization, quantization effects, conversion algorithms, spectral performance, element matching, design for yield, and practical comparators, implementation issues.""Analysis and design of phase-locked loops implemented in modern CMOS processes including: architectures, performance metrics, and characterization; noise and stability analysis; and design issues of phase-frequency detectors, charge pumps, loop filters (passive and active), voltage controlled oscillators, and frequency dividers.""Phase-locked loops, frequency synthesizers, clock and data recovery circuits, theory and implementation of adaptive filters, low-noise amplifiers, mixers, power amplifiers, transmitter and receiver architectures.""A study of basic algorithm design and analysis techniques. Advanced data structures, amortized analysis and randomized algorithms. Applications to sorting, graphs, and geometry. NP-completeness and approximation algorithms."Introduction to parallelization techniques and numerical methods for distributed memory high performance computers. A semester project in an area related to each studentÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s research interests is required."Models of parallel computation, performance measures, basic parallel constructs and communication primitives, parallel programming using MPI, parallel algorithms for selected problems including sorting, matrix, tree and graph problems, fast Fourier transforms.""The application of randomization and probabilistic methods in the design of computer algorithms, and their efficient implementation. Discrete random variables in modeling algorithm behavior, with applications to sorting, selection, graph algorithms, hashing, pattern matching, cryptography, distributed systems, and massive data set algorithmics.""Detailed examination of networking standards, protocols, and their implementation. TCP/IP protocol suite, network application protocols.  Network security issues, attack and mitigation techniques. Emphasis on laboratory experiments.""Computer, software, and data security: basic cryptography, security policies, multilevel security models, attack and protection mechanisms, legal and ethical issues.""Computer system and network security: implementation, configuration, testing of security software and hardware, network monitoring. Authentication, firewalls, vulnerabilities, exploits, countermeasures. Study and use of attack tools. Ethics in information assurance. Emphasis on laboratory experiments.""Basic concepts of secure communication, DES and AES, public-key cryptosystems, elliptic curves, hash algorithms, digital signatures, applications. Relevant material on number theory and finite fields."Legal and ethical issues in computer security. State and local codes and regulations. Privacy issues."Basic principles of covert communication, steganalysis, and forensic analysis for digital images. Steganographic security and   capacity, matrix embedding, blind attacks, image forensic detection and device identification techniques. Related material on coding   theory, statistics, image processing, pattern recognition.""Fundamentals of computer and network forensics, forensic duplication and analysis, network surveillance, intrusion detection and response, incident response, anonymity and pseudonymity, privacy-protection techniques, cyber law, computer security policies and guidelines, court testimony and report writing, and case studies. Emphasis on hands-on experiments.""Introduction to the physical layer and special issues associated with the security of wireless networks. The basics of wireless communication systems (antennas and propagation, modulation, multiple access, channel modeling, specific security issues of the wireless link), jamming and countermeasures (spread spectrum technologies, channel coding, interleaving), authentication and confidentiality (basics of classic cryptography, common authentication and encryption algorithms). Detailed case studies on authentication, encryption and privacy flaws, and good practices based on the most common wireless technologies, including WiFi, GSM/3G, Bluetooth, and RFID. Individual or team-based class projects.""Techniques and tools for understanding the behavior of software/hardware systems based on reverse engineering. Flaw hypothesis, black, grey, and white box testing as well as other methods for testing the security of software systems. Discussion of counter-reverse engineering techniques.""Introduction to cyber security, cyber physical system (CPS), and smart grid automation technologies; supervisor control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems; cyber risk modeling, vulnerability analysis, impact analysis, defense and mitigation techniques; cyber security of wide-area monitoring, protection, and control; security and privacy in advanced metering infrastructure (AMI), cyber security compliance and best practices, CPS security test-beds and attack-defense hands-on laboratory experiments.""Selected topics from recent advances in high performance networks; next generation internet; asynchronous transfer mode; traffic management, quality of service; high speed switching.""Optical components and interfaces; optical transmission and reception techniques; wavelength division multiplexing; network architectures and protocol for first generation, single and multihop optical network; routing and wavelength assignment in second generation wavelength routing networks; traffic grooming, optical network control; survivability; access networks; metro networks.""Introduction to the protocol architecture of the data link layer, network layer and transport layer for wireless networking. Operation and management of Medium Access Control in Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN) and Wireless Metropolitan Area Networks (WMAN); recent developments in IEEE 802.11 & 802.16 and Bluetooth; Mobile IP; Mobile TCP.""Survey of key bioinformatics methods, including hands-on use of computational tools to solve various biological problems. Topics include: database searching, sequence alignment, gene prediction, RNA and protein structure prediction, construction of phylogenetic trees, comparative and functional genomics, and systems biology.""Faults and their manifestations, errors, and failures; fault detection, location and reconfiguration techniques; time, space, and information (coding) redundancy management; design for testability; self-checking and fail-safe circuits; system-level fault diagnosis; Byzantine agreement; stable storage and RAID; clock synchronization; fault-tolerant networks; fault tolerance in real-time systems; reliable software design; checkpointing and rollback recovery; atomic actions; replica management protocols; and reliability evaluation techniques and tools.""Fundamental and well-known protocols for wireless ad hoc and sensor networks at various layers, including physical layer issues, MAC (medium access control) layer protocols, routing protocols for wireless ad hoc and sensor networks, data management in sensor networks, coverage and connectivity, localization and tracking, security and privacy issues. Introduction to TinyOS and the nesC language. Hands-on experiments with Crossbow Mote sensor devices.""Analytical approach to resource allocation on communication networks (e.g. the Internet, multihop wireless networks, etc.). Network utility maximization and the internet congestion control algorithm. Layering as optimization decomposition: a cross-layer design approach in multihop wireless networks. Capacity of ad hoc wireless networks.""Design and analysis of algorithms for applications in computational biology, pairwise and multiple sequence alignments, approximation algorithms, string algorithms including in-depth coverage of suffix trees, semi-numerical string algorithms, algorithms for selected problems in fragment assembly, phylogenetic trees and protein folding. No background in biology is assumed. Also useful as an advanced algorithms course in string processing.""Fundamentals of distributed computing, software agents, naming services, distributed transactions, security management, distributed object-based systems, web-based systems, middleware-based application design and development, case studies of middleware and internet applications.""(3-1) Cr. 3. Theoretical and practical issues of design and implementation of distributed systems.  The client server paradigm, inter-process communications, synchronization and concurrency control, naming, consistency and replication, fault tolerance, and distributed file systems. Graduate credit requires additional in-depth study of concepts.  Programming projects and written reports.""Design and analysis techniques scalable to large software, project-based learning of problem solving techniques, automation tools for high productivity and reliability of software, analysis-based measurement and estimation techniques for predictable software engineering.""Fundamentals of computer graphics technology. Data structures. Parametric curve and surface modeling. Solid model representations. Applications in engineering design, analysis, and manufacturing.""Fundamental concepts in real-time systems. Real time task scheduling paradigms. Resource management in uniprocessor, multiprocessor, and distributed real-time systems. Fault-tolerance, resource reclaiming, and overload handling. Real-time channel, packet scheduling, and real-time LAN protocols. Case study of real-time operating systems. Laboratory experiments."Physical design of VLSI systems. Partitioning algorithms. Placement and floorplanning algorithms. Routing-global and detailed. Layout compaction. Physical design of FPGA's and MCM's. Performance-driven layout synthesis.Biology as an information science. Review of algorithms and information processing. Generative models for sequences. String algorithms. Pairwise sequence alignment. Multiple sequence alignment. Searching sequence databases. Genome sequence assembly."Algorithmic and statistical approaches in structural genomics including protein, DNA and RNA structure. Structure determination, refinement, representation, comparison, visualization, and modeling. Analysis and prediction of protein secondary and tertiary structure, disorder, protein cores and surfaces, protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions, protein localization and function.""Algorithmic and statistical approaches in computational functional genomics and systems biology. Elements of experiment design. Analysis of high throughput gene expression, proteomics, and other datasets obtained using system-wide measurements. Topological analysis, module discovery, and comparative analysis of gene and protein networks. Modeling, analysis, simulation and inference of transcriptional regulatory modules and networks, protein-protein interaction networks, metabolic networks, cells and systems: Dynamic systems, Boolean, and probabilistic models. Multi-scale, multi-granularity models. Ontology-driven, network based, and probabilistic approaches to information integration.""This class covers statistical and algorithmic methods for sensing, recognizing, and interpreting   the activities of people by a computer. This semester we will focus on machine perception   techniques that facilitate and augment human-computer interaction. The main goal of the class is to   introduce computational perception on both theoretical and practical levels. Participation in small   groups to design, implement, and evaluate a prototype of a human-computer interaction system that   uses one or more of the techniques covered in the lectures.""Quantitative principles of computer architecture design, instruction set design, processor architecture: pipelining and superscalar design, instruction level parallelism, memory organization: cache and virtual memory systems, multiprocessor architecture, cache coherency, interconnection networks and message routing, I/O devices and peripherals.""Review of probability and stochastic processes concepts; Markovian processes; Markovian queues; renewal theory; semi-Markovian queues; queueing networks, applications to multiprocessor architectures, computer networks, and switching systems.""Introduction to reconfigurable computing, FPGA technology and architectures, spatial computing architectures such as systolic and bit serial adaptive network architectures, static and dynamic rearrangeable interconnection architectures, processor architectures incorporating reconfigurabiltiy.""Industry-standard tools and optimization strategies; practical embedded platforms and technology (reconfigurable platforms, multi-core platforms, low-power platforms); instruction augmentation, memory-mapped accelerator design, embedded software optimization. Students will be encouraged to compete as teams in an embedded system design competition.""An introduction to the emerging interdisciplinary field of Developmental Robotics, which crosses the boundaries between robotics, artificial intelligence, developmental psychology, and philosophy. The main goal of this field is to create autonomous robots that are more intelligent, more adaptable, and more useful than the robots of today, which can only function in very limited domains and situations.""Fundamentals of pervasive computing, including location and context awareness, mobile and location services, ubiquitous data access, low power computing and energy management, middleware, security and privacy issues.""Hardware/software systems and codesign. Models of computation for embedded systems. System-level design. Modeling, specification, synthesis, and verification. Hardware/software implementation. Design space exploration. Performance analysis and optimization. Multiprocessor system on chip. Platform-based design. Design methodologies and tools.  Case studies and design projects."Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in computer engineering.Projects or seminar in Computer Engineering."Algorithm design for high-performance computing. Parallel algorithms for multidimensional tree data structures, space-filling curves, random number generation, graph partitioning and load balancing. Applications to grid and particle-based methods and computational biology.""Capstone design course which integrates the security design process. Design of a security policy. Creation of a security plan. Implementation of the security plan. The students will attack each other's secure environments in an effort to defeat the security systems. Students evaluate the security plans and the performance of the plans. Social, political and ethics issues. Student self-evaluation, journaling, final written report.""Current topics in computer architecture design and implementation. Advanced pipelining, cache and memory design techniques. Interaction of algorithms with architecture models and implementations. Tradeoffs in architecture models and implementations."One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to the procedures and policies of Iowa State University and the Department of Computer Science, test-outs, honorary societies, etc. Issues relevant to student adjustment to college life will also be discussed.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to computer literacy and applications. Applications: Windows, Internet browser/HTML, word processing, spreadsheets, database management and presentation software. Literacy: history of computing, structure of computers, telecommunications, computer ethics, computer crime, and history of programming languages. No prior computer experience necessary.  Course is offered online only.  Students must attend an orientation session the first week of class.""Offered first 8 weeks and last 8 weeks. Use of personal computer and workstation operating systems and beginning programming. Project-oriented approach to computer operation and programming, including use of tools to aid in programming. Topics from computer history, using basic Windows and Unix tools, program structure, expression, variables, decision and logic, and iteration. No prior computer experience necessary.""8-week course in programming, including instruction in syntax and semantics, of the following current programming languages."8-week course in programming using Perl.8-week course in programming using MATLAB."Introduction to Web programming basics. Fundamentals of developing Web pages using a comprehensive Web development life cycle. In-depth experience with current Web design techniques such as HTML5 and cascading style sheets. Programming strategies for accessibility, usability and search engine optimization."Introduction to computer programming for non-majors using a language such as the Visual Basic language. Basics of good programming and algorithm development. Graphical user interfaces."Advanced programming applications in Visual Basic for non-majors. Emphasis on programming projects including sorting, file processing, database processing, web programming, and graphics and animation. Students will learn problem solving techniques and advanced programming skills to build real-world applications.""Using Microsoft Excel spreadsheets and Microsoft Access databases to input, store, process, manipulate, query, and analyze data for business and industrial applications.   Credit in Com S 113 may not be applied toward graduation in the COM S, S E, and CPR E majors. Only one of COM S 103 and COM S 113 may count toward graduation.""Computer programming in COBOL. Emphasis on the design, writing, debugging, and testing of business applications programs in a transaction-oriented environment."Computer science as a profession. Introduction to career fields open to computer science majors. Relationship of coursework to careers. Presentations by computer science professionals.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."An introduction to computer programming using an object-oriented programming language. Emphasis on the basics of good programming techniques and style. Extensive practice in designing, implementing, and debugging small programs. Use of abstract data types. Interactive and file I/O. Exceptions/error-handling. This course is not designed for computer science, software engineering, and computer engineering majors.   Credit may not be applied toward graduation for both Com S 207/MIS 207 and Com S 227.""Intermediate-level programming techniques. Emphasis on designing, writing, testing, debugging, and documenting medium-sized programs. Data structures and their uses. Dynamic memory usage. Inheritance and polymorphism. Algorithm design and efficiency: recursion, searching, and sorting. Event-driven and GUI programming. The software development process. This course is not designed for computer science, software engineering and computer engineering majors.   Credit may not be applied toward the major in computer science, software engineering, or computer engineering.""Introduction to object-oriented design and programming techniques. Symbolic and numerical computation, recursion and iteration, modularity procedural and data abstraction,  and specifications and subtyping. Object-oriented techniques including encapsulation, inheritance and polymorphism.  Imperative programming. Emphasis on principles of programming and object-oriented design through extensive practice in design, writing, running, debugging, and reasoning. Course intended for Com S majors.   Credit may not be applied toward graduation for both Com S 207 and 227.""An object-oriented approach to data structures and algorithms. Object-oriented analysis, design, and programming, with emphasis on data abstraction, inheritance and subtype polymorphism. Abstract data type specification and correctness. Collections and associated algorithms, such as stacks, queues, lists, trees. Searching and sorting algorithms. Graphs. Data on secondary storage. Analysis of algoritms. Emphasis on object-oriented design, writing and documenting medium-sized programs. This course is designed for majors.""Concepts in discrete mathematics as applied to computer science. Logic, proof techniques, set theory, relations, graphs, combinatorics, discrete probability and number theory.""Introduction to installation, utilization, and administration of Linux systems.  Topics include open-source software, package installation and management, shell programming and command-line utilities, process and service management, account management, network configuration, file sharing, interoperation with other computers and operating systems, automation, and system security."Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."A practical introduction to methods for managing software development. Process models, requirements analysis, structured and object-oriented design, coding, testing, maintenance, cost and schedule estimation, metrics. Programming projects.""Basic techniques for design and analysis of efficient algorithms. Sorting, searching, graph algorithms, computational geometry, string processing and NP-completeness. Design techniques such as dynamic programming and the greedy method. Asymptotic, worst-case, average-case and amortized analyses. Data structures including heaps, hash tables, binary search trees and red-black trees. Programming projects.""Basic theory of grammars, parsing.  Language paradigms. State transition and table-based software design.   Review of principles of object orientation, object oriented analysis using UML.   Frameworks and APIs. User interface architecture, evaluation of user interface. Design of windows, menus, and commands. Introduction to formal specification and model-based software design. Introduction to domain-specific software engineering.""Introduction to computer architecture and organization. Emphasis on evaluation of performance, instruction set architecture, datapath and control, memory-hierarchy design, and pipelining. Assembly language on a simulator.""Object-oriented programming experience using a language suitable for exploring advanced topics in programming. Topics include memory management, parameter passing, inheritance, compiling, debugging, and maintaining programs. Significant programming projects.""Models of computation: finite state automata, pushdown automata and Turing machines. Study of grammars and their relation to automata. Limits of digital computation, unsolvability and Church-Turing thesis. Chomsky hierarchy and relations between classes of languages.""Basic algorithms, design, and programming of interactive computer graphics systems and hardware.  Topics include 2D and 3D transformations, 3D viewing, visible surface algorithms, collision detection, illumination models, shading, ray tracing, shadows, transparency and texture mapping.""Study of concepts in programming languages and major programming paradigms, especially functional programming. Special emphasis on design tradeoffs that enable students to make sound choices of programming languages for a given software development task.  Programming projects.""Divisibility, integer representations, primes and divisors, linear diophantine equations,   congruences, and multiplicative functions. Applications to cryptography.""Survey of operating system issues. Introduction to hardware and software components including: processors, peripherals, interrupts, management of processes, threads and memory, deadlocks, file systems, protection, virtual machines and system organization, and introduction to distributed operating systems. Programming projects."Object-oriented requirements analysis and systems design. Design notations such as the Unifed Modeling Language. Design Patterns.  Group design and programming with large programming projects."Relational, object-oriented, and semistructured data models and query languages. SQL, ODMG, and XML standards. Database design using entity-relationship model, data dependencies and object definition language. Application development in SQL-like languages and general purpose host languages with application program interfaces. Information integration using data warehouses, mediators and wrappers. Programming Projects."Required of all cooperative students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Students work as individuals and teams to complete the planning, design, and implementation of a significant project in the topic area. Oral and written reports.""Students conceive, plan, architect and design a computer game. Student registered in this course will work with students in ARTIS 409. Oral and written reports.""Students implement, test, and present a completed production computer game. Students in this class will work with students in ARTIS 409. Oral and written reports.""Students work as individuals and teams to complete the planning, design, and implementation of a significant project in the topic area. Oral and written reports.""The requirements engineering process including identification of stakeholders requirements elicitation techniques such as interviews and prototyping, analysis fundamentals, requirements specification, and validation. Use of Models: State-oriented, Function-oriented, and Object-oriented. Documentation for Software Requirements. Informal, semi-formal, and formal representations. Structural, informational, and behavioral requirements. Non-functional requirements. Use of requirements repositories to manage and track requirements through the life cycle. Case studies, software projects, written reports, and oral presentations will be required.""Team with students at foreign universities to develop a software application.  Importance of distributed development. Design for distributed development, effective processes for distributed development, and cultural issues in distributed development, organizing for distributed development, communication techniques and skills for distributed development,including oral presentations.  Graduate credit requires in-Ìâå_depth study of concepts.""A study of formal techniques for model-based specification and verification of software systems. Topics include logics, formalisms, graph theory, numerical computations, algorithms and tools for automatic analysis of systems. Graduate credit requires in-Ìâå_depth study of concepts.""An interdisciplinary course designed for students who are interested in assistive technology, pervasive computing, mobile computing and principles of universal and inclusive design for end users, in particular, the elderly population. Students will work in semester-long projects as interdisciplinary teams to apply knowledge obtained from lectures and mutual presentations. For graduate credit students are required to submit a research report and give an oral presentation.""Comprehensive study of software testing, principles, methodologies, management strategies and techniques. Test models, test design techniques (black box and white box testing techniques), test adequacy criteria,integration, regression, system testing methods, and software testing tools.""Introduction to data structures, algorithms, and analysis techniques for computational problems that involve geometry. Line segment intersection, polygon triangulation, 2D linear programming, range queries, point location, arrangements and duality, Voronoi diagrams and Delaunay triangulation, convex hulls, robot motion planning, visibility graphs. Other selected topics. Programming assignments.""Propositional and predicate logic.  Topics selected from Horn logic, equational logic,   resolution and unification, foundations of logic programming, reasoning about programs, program specification and verification, model checking and binary decision diagrams, temporal logic and modal logic."Numerical serial and parallel computing using the Message Passing Interface. Oral and written semester project."Introduction to high performance computing platforms including parallel computers and workstation clusters. Discussion of parallel architectures, performance, programming models, and software development issues. Sample applications from science and engineering. Practical issues in high performance computing will be emphasized via a number of programming projects using a variety of programming models and case studies. Oral and written reports.""Models of parallel computation, performance measures, basic parallel constructs and communication primitives, parallel programming using MPI, parallel algorithms for selected problems including sorting, matrix, tree and graph problems, fast Fourier transforms.""Topics in advanced programming techniques and tools widely used by industry (e.g., event-driven programming and graphical user interfaces, standard libraries, client/server architectures and techniques for distributed applications). Emphasis on programming projects in a modern integrated development environment. Oral and written reports.""Modeling and analysis of natural and engineered systems that spontaneously assemble themselves from small components. Topics include biomolecular self-assembly, tile assembly models, computation via self-assembly, distributed folding, origami models, and self-repair. Emphasis on mathematical methods of describing, simulating, programming, and verifying the behaviors of self-assembling systems. Graduate credit requires a written or oral report on current research.""Challenges involved in solving computational problems on massive data sets. Discussion of computational problems that arise in the context of web search, social network analysis, recommendation systems, and online advertising etc. Theoretical aspects include modeling the computational problems using graphs, study of similarity measures and hash functions, and design of efficient algorithms for graphs. Practical aspects include implementation and performance evaluation of the algorithms on real world data sets. Graduate credit requires a written report on current research.""Students will learn video game programming using current game engine interfaces with real hardware. Particular attention is paid to the console architecture, development environment, tool chains, 2D graphics, 3D graphics, controllers, memory management, and audio systems. Students will complete the course by writing a simple game that runs on console hardware.""Theory of compiling and implementation issues of programming languages. Programming projects leading to the construction of a compiler. Projects with different difficulty levels will be given for 440 and 540. Topics: lexical, syntax and semantic analyses, syntax-directed translation, runtime environment and library support. Written reports."Survey of the goals and problems of language design. Formal and informal studies of a wide variety of programming language features including type systems. Creative use of functional and declarative programming paradigms."Broad overview of bioinformatics with a significant problem-solving component, including hands-on practice using computational tools to solve a variety of biological problems. Topics include: bioinformatic data processing, Perl programming, genome assembly, database search, sequence alignment, gene prediction, next-generation sequencing, comparative and functional genomics, and systems biology.""(3-1) Cr. 3. Theoretical and practical issues of design and implementation of distributed systems.  The client server paradigm, inter-process communications, synchronization and concurrency control, naming, consistency and replication, fault tolerance, and distributed file systems. Graduate credit requires additional in-depth study of concepts.  Programming projects and written reports.""Introduction to discrete-event simulation with a focus on computer science applications, including performance evaluation of networks and distributed systems. Overview of algorithms and data structures necessary to implement simulation software. Discrete and continuous stochastic models, random number generation, elementary statistics, simulation of queuing and inventory systems, Monte Carlo simulation, point and interval parameter estimation. Graduate credit requires additional in-depth study of concepts. Oral and written reports.""Models for structured and semistructured data. Algebraic, first order, and user-oriented query languages. Database schema design. Physical storage, access methods, and query processing. Transaction management, concurrency control, and crash recovery. Database security. Information integration using data warehouses, mediators, wrappers, and data mining. Parallel and distributed databases, and special purpose databases. Students enrolling in COM S 561  will require additional study of advanced concepts in database systems.""Specification, design, implementation, and selected applications of intelligent software agents and multi-agent systems. Computational models of intelligent behavior, including problem solving, knowledge representation, reasoning, planning, decision making, learning, perception, action, communication and interaction. Reactive, deliberative, rational, adaptive, learning and communicative agents and multiagent systems. Artificial intelligence programming. A research project and a written report is required for students enrolled in COM S 572.""Basic principles, techniques, and applications of Machine Learning. Design, analysis, implementation, and applications of learning algorithms. Topics include: statistical learning, pattern classification, function approximation, Bayesian learning, linear  models, artificial neural networks, support vector machines, decision trees, instance based learning, probabilistic graphical models, unsupervised learning, selected applications in automated knowledge acquisition, pattern recognition, and data mining.""Selected topics in applied mathematics and modern heuristics that have found applications in areas such as geometric modeling, graphics, robotics, vision, human machine interface, speech recognition, computer animation, etc. Homogeneous coordinates and transformations, perspective projection, quaternions and rotations, polynomial interpolation, roots of polynomials, resultants, solution of linear and nonlinear equations, approximation, data fitting,  Fourier series and fast Fourier transform, linear programming, nonlinear optimization, Lagrange multipliers, parametric and algebraic curves, curvature, Frenet formulas, Bezier curves. Programming components. A scholarly report is required for graduate credit.""First order Euler method, high order Runge-Kutta method, and multistep method for solving ordinary differential equations. Finite difference and finite element methods for solving partial differential equations. Local truncation error, stability, and convergence for finite difference method.  Numerical solution space, polynomial approximation, and error estimate for finite element method.""An introduction to fundamental concepts in the design and implementation of computer communication in both the wired and wireless networks, their protocols, and applications. Layered network architecture in the Internet, applications, transport, Socket APIs, network, and data link layers and their protocols, multimedia networking, and network security.""Programming paradigms for building distributed and networking applications, including multithreaded client-server programming, socket programming, distributed object frameworks and programming suites, and web computing and security. Introduction to some on-going research issues in distributed and networking applications, including peer-to-peer computing, multimedia communications, and mobile computing and networking.   A written report and an oral presentation is required for students enrolling in COM S 587."Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than 9 credits of Com S 490 may be counted toward graduation.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than 9 credits of Com S 490 may be counted toward graduation."Understanding core techniques in artificial life is based on basic readings in complex adaptive systems. Techniques of complex system analysis methods including: evolutionary computation, neural nets, agent based simulations (agent based computational economics). Large-scale simulations are to be emphasized, e.g. power grids, whole ecosystems.""Survey of complex systems and their analysis. Examples are drawn from engineering, computer science, biology, economics and physics.""The requirements engineering process including identification of stakeholders requirements elicitation techniques such as interviews and prototyping, analysis fundamentals, requirements specification, and validation. Use of Models: State-oriented, Function-oriented, and Object-oriented. Documentation for Software Requirements. Informal, semi-formal, and formal representations. Structural, informational, and behavioral requirements. Non-functional requirements. Use of requirements repositories to manage and track requirements through the life cycle. Case studies, software projects, written reports, and oral presentations will be required.""Team with students at foreign universities to develop a software application.  Importance of distributed development. Design for distributed development, effective processes for distributed development, and cultural issues in distributed development, organizing for distributed development, communication techniques and skills for distributed development,including oral presentations.  Graduate credit requires in-Ìâå_depth study of concepts.""A study of basic algorithm design and analysis techniques. Advanced data structures, amortized analysis and randomized algorithms. Applications to sorting, graphs, and geometry. NP-completeness and approximation algorithms.""A study of formal techniques for model-Ìâå_based specification and verification of software systems. Topics include logics, formalisms, graph theory, numerical computations, algorithms and tools for automatic analysis of systems. Graduate credit requires in-Ìâå_depth study of concepts.""An interdisciplinary course designed for students who are interested in assistive technology, pervasive computing, mobile computing and principles of universal and inclusive design for end users, in particular, the elderly population. Students will work in semester-long projects as interdisciplinary teams to apply knowledge obtained from lectures and mutual presentations. For graduate credit students are required to submit a research report and give an oral presentation.""An introduction to the analysis, design, and testing of software for safety-critical and high-integrity systems. Analysis techniques, formal verification, fault identification and recovery, model checking, and certification issues. Emphasizes a case-based and systematic approach to software's role in safe systems.""Introduction to data structures, algorithms, and analysis techniques for computational problems that involve geometry. Line segment intersection, polygon triangulation, 2D linear programming, range queries, point location, arrangements and duality, Voronoi diagrams and Delaunay triangulation, convex hulls, robot motion planning, visibility graphs. Other selected topics. Programming assignments."Introduction to parallelization techniques and numerical methods for distributed memory high performance computers. A semester project in an area related to each studentÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s research interests is required."Models of parallel computation, performance measures, basic parallel constructs and communication primitives, parallel programming using MPI, parallel algorithms for selected problems including sorting, matrix, tree and graph problems, fast Fourier transforms.""A systematic study of the fundamental models and analytical methods of theoretical computer science. Computability, the Church-Turing thesis, decidable and undecidable problems, and the elements of recursive function theory. Time complexity, logic, Boolean circuits, and NP-completeness. Role of randomness in computation.""Modeling and analysis of natural and engineered systems that spontaneously assemble themselves from small components. Topics include biomolecular self-assembly, tile assembly models, computation via self-assembly, distributed folding, origami models, and self-repair. Emphasis on mathematical methods of describing, simulating, programming, and verifying the behaviors of self-assembling systems. Graduate credit requires a written or oral report on current research.""Theory of compiling and implementation issues of programming languages. Programming projects leading to the construction of a compiler. Projects with different difficulty levels will be given for 440 and 540. Topics: lexical, syntax and semantic analyses, syntax-directed translation, runtime environment and library support. Written reports."Survey of the goals and problems of language design. Formal and informal studies of a wide variety of programming language features including type systems. Creative use of functional and declarative programming paradigms."Survey of key bioinformatics methods, including hands-on use of computational tools to solve various biological problems. Topics include: database searching, sequence alignment, gene prediction, RNA and protein structure prediction, construction of phylogenetic trees, comparative and functional genomics, and systems biology.""Design and analysis of algorithms for applications in computational biology, pairwise and multiple sequence alignments, approximation algorithms, string algorithms including in-depth coverage of suffix trees, semi-numerical string algorithms, algorithms for selected problems in fragment assembly, phylogenetic trees and protein folding. No background in biology is assumed. Also useful as an advanced algorithms course in string processing.""Discussion and analysis of basic evolutionary principles and the necessary knowledge in computational biology to solve real world problems. Topics include character and distance based methods, phylogenetic tree distances, and consensus methods, and approaches to extract the necessary information from sequence-databases to build phylogenetic trees.""Introduction to practical sequence assembly and comparison techniques. Topics include global alignment, local alignment, overlapping alignment, banded alignment, linear-space alignment, word hashing, DNA-protein alignment, DNA-cDNA alignment, comparison of two sets of sequences, construction of contigs, and generation of consensus sequences. Focus on development of sequence assembly and comparison programs.""A comparative study of high-level language facilities for process synchronization and communication. Formal analysis of deadlock, concurrency control and recovery. Protection issues including capability-based systems, access and flow control, encryption, and authentication. Additional topics chosen from distributed operating systems, soft real-time operating systems, and advanced security issues.""(3-1) Cr. 3. Theoretical and practical issues of design and implementation of distributed systems.  The client server paradigm, inter-process communications, synchronization and concurrency control, naming, consistency and replication, fault tolerance, and distributed file systems. Graduate credit requires additional in-depth study of concepts.  Programming projects and written reports.""Introduction to discrete-event simulation with a focus on computer science applications, including performance evaluation of networks and distributed systems. Overview of algorithms and data structures necessary to implement simulation software. Discrete and continuous stochastic models, random number generation, elementary statistics, simulation of queuing and inventory systems, Monte Carlo simulation, point and interval parameter estimation. Graduate credit requires additional in-depth study of concepts. Oral and written reports.""Introduction to the use of stochastic models to study complex systems, including network communication and distributed systems. Data structures and algorithms for analyzing discrete-state models expressed in high-level formalisms. State space and reachability graph construction, model checking, Markov chain construction and numerical solution, computation of performance measures, product-form models, approximations, and advanced techniques.""Fundamentals of computer graphics technology. Data structures. Parametric curve and surface modeling. Solid model representations. Applications in engineering design, analysis, and manufacturing.""Introduction to visualizing scientific information with 3D computer graphics and their foundation in human perception. Overview of different visualization techniques and examples of 3D visualization projects from different disciplines (natural sciences, medicine, and engineering). Class project in interactive 3D visualization using the ParaView, Mayavi, TVTK, VTK or a similar system.""Models for structured and semistructured data. Algebraic, first order, and user-oriented query languages. Database schema design. Physical storage, access methods, and query processing. Transaction management, concurrency control, and crash recovery. Database security. Information integration using data warehouses, mediators, wrappers, and data mining. Parallel and distributed databases, and special purpose databases. Students enrolling in COM S 561  will require additional study of advanced concepts in database systems."Biology as an information science. Review of algorithms and information processing. Generative models for sequences. String algorithms. Pairwise sequence alignment. Multiple sequence alignment. Searching sequence databases. Genome sequence assembly.Advanced sequence models.  Basic methods in molecular phylogeny.  Hidden Markov models.  Genome annotation.  DNA and protein motifs. Introduction to gene expression analysis."Algorithmic and statistical approaches in structural genomics including protein, DNA and RNA structure. Structure determination, refinement, representation, comparison, visualization, and modeling. Analysis and prediction of protein secondary and tertiary structure, disorder, protein cores and surfaces, protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions, protein localization and function.""Algorithmic and statistical approaches in computational functional genomics and systems biology. Elements of experiment design. Analysis of high throughput gene expression, proteomics, and other datasets obtained using system-wide measurements. Topological analysis, module discovery, and comparative analysis of gene and protein networks. Modeling, analysis, simulation and inference of transcriptional regulatory modules and networks, protein-protein interaction networks, metabolic networks, cells and systems: Dynamic systems, Boolean, and probabilistic models. Multi-scale, multi-granularity models. Ontology-driven, network based, and probabilistic approaches to information integration.""Specification, design, implementation, and selected applications of intelligent software agents and multi-agent systems. Computational models of intelligent behavior, including problem solving, knowledge representation, reasoning, planning, decision making, learning, perception, action, communication and interaction. Reactive, deliberative, rational, adaptive, learning and communicative agents and multiagent systems. Artificial intelligence programming. A research project and a written report is required for students enrolled in COM S 572.""Algorithmic models of learning. Design, analysis, implementation and applications of learning algorithms. Learning of concepts, classification rules, functions, relations, grammars, probability distributions, value functions, models, skills, behaviors and programs. Agents that learn from observation, examples, instruction, induction, deduction, reinforcement and interaction. Computational learning theory. Data mining and knowledge discovery using artificial neural networks, support vector machines, decision trees, Bayesian networks, association rules, dimensionality reduction, feature selection and visualization. Learning from heterogeneous, distributed, dynamic data and knowledge sources. Learning in multi-agent systems. Selected applications in automated knowledge acquisition, pattern recognition, program synthesis, bioinformatics and Internet-based information systems. Oral and written reports.""This class covers statistical and algorithmic methods for sensing, recognizing, and interpreting   the activities of people by a computer. This semester we will focus on machine perception   techniques that facilitate and augment human-computer interaction. The main goal of the class is to   introduce computational perception on both theoretical and practical levels. Participation in small   groups to design, implement, and evaluate a prototype of a human-computer interaction system that   uses one or more of the techniques covered in the lectures.""Selected topics in applied mathematics and modern heuristics that have found applications in areas such as geometric modeling, graphics, robotics, vision, human machine interface, speech recognition, computer animation, etc. Homogeneous coordinates and transformations, perspective projection, quaternions and rotations, polynomial interpolation, roots of polynomials, resultants, solution of linear and nonlinear equations, approximation, data fitting,  Fourier series and fast Fourier transform, linear programming, nonlinear optimization, Lagrange multipliers, parametric and algebraic curves, curvature, Frenet formulas, Bezier curves. Programming components. A scholarly report is required for graduate credit.""Quantitative principles of computer architecture design, instruction set design, processor architecture: pipelining and superscalar design, instruction level parallelism, memory organization: cache and virtual memory systems, multiprocessor architecture, cache coherency, interconnection networks and message routing, I/O devices and peripherals.""Introduction to reconfigurable computing, FPGA technology and architectures, spatial computing architectures such as systolic and bit serial adaptive network architectures, static and dynamic rearrangeable interconnection architectures, processor architectures incorporating reconfigurabiltiy.""Design and implementation of computer communication networks: layered network architectures, local area networks, data link protocols, distributed routing, transport services, network programming interfaces, network applications, error control, flow/congestion control, interconnection of heterogeneous networks, TCP/IP, ATM networks, multimedia communications, IP and application multicast, overlay networks, network security and web computing.""Programming paradigms for building distributed and networking applications, including multithreaded client-server programming, socket programming, distributed object frameworks and programming suites, and web computing and security. Introduction to some on-going research issues in distributed and networking applications, including peer-to-peer computing, multimedia communications, and mobile computing and networking.   A written report and an oral presentation is required for students enrolling in COM S 587."Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Attend Computer Science Research Colloquia. Written summary is required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised internship working in professional settings appropriate to the student's degree program. Academic work under faculty supervision.Creative component for nonthesis option of Master of Science degree.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Advanced algorithm analysis and design techniques. Topics include graph algorithms, algebraic algorithms, number-theoretic algorithms, randomized and parallel algorithms. Intractable problems and NP-completeness. Advanced data structures.""The theory of distributed computation. Algorithms, lower bounds and impossibility results. Leader Elections, mutual exlusion, consensus and clock synchronization algorithms. Synchronous, asynchronous and partially synchronous distributed systems models. Shared memory and message passing systems. Fault-tolerance and randomization. Broadcast and multicast. Wait-free object simulations. Distributed shared memory.""Algorithm design for high-performance computing. Parallel algorithms for multidimensional tree data structures, space-filling curves, random number generation, graph partitioning and load balancing. Applications to grid and particle-based methods and computational biology.""Advanced study in the quantitative theory of computation. Time and space complexity of algorithmic problems. The structure of P, NP, PH, PSPACE, and other complexity classes, especially with respect to resource-bounded reducibilities and complete problems. Complexity relative to auxiliary information, including oracle computation and relativized classes, randomized algorithms, advice machines, Boolean circuits. Kolmogorov complexity and randomness.""Advanced study of the role of randomness in computation. Randomized algorithms, derandomization, and probabilistic complexity classes. Kolmogorov complexity, algorithmic information theory, and algorithmic randomness. Applications chosen from cryptography, interactive proof systems, computational learning, lower bound arguments, mathematical logic, and the organization of complex systems.""Fundamentals of Game Theory: individual decision making, strategic and extensive games, mixed strategies, backward induction, Nash and other equilibrium concepts. Discussion of Auctions and Bargaining. Repeated, Bayesian and evolutionary games. Interactive Epistemology: reasoning about knowledge in multiagent environment, properties of knowledge, agreements, and common knowledge. Reasoning about and representing uncertainty, probabilities, and beliefs. Uncertainty in multiagent environments. Aspects and applications of game theory, knowledge, and uncertainty in other areas, especially Artificial Intelligence and Economics, will be discussed.""Operational and other mathematical models of programming language semantics. Type systems and their soundness. Applications of semantics on areas such as program correctness, language design or translation.""Concepts and techniques for network and distributed operating systems: Communications protocols, processes and threads, name and object management, synchronization, consistency and replications for consistent distributed data, fault tolerance, protection and security, distributed file systems, design of reliable software, performance analysis.""Modern lighting models: Rendering Equation, Spherical Harmonics, Lafortune, Cook-Torrance. Non-polygonal primitives: volumes, points, particles. Textures: filtering, reflections creation. Graphics hardware: pipeline, performance issues, programmability in vertex and fragment path. Per-pixel lighting. Nonphotorealistic rendering. Radiosity; Ray tracing.""Advanced topics chosen from the following: database design, data models, query systems, query optimization, incomplete information, logic and databases, multimedia databases; temporal, spatial and belief databases, semistructured data, concurrency control, parallel and distributed databases, information retrieval, data warehouses, wrappers, mediators, and data mining.""Selected topics in Computational Learning Theory (PAC learning, Sample complexity, VC Dimension, Occam Learning, Boosting, active learning, Kolomogorov Complexity, Learning under helpful distributions, Mistake Bound Analysis). Selected topics in Bayesian and Information Theoretic Models (ML, MAP, MDL, MML). Advanced statistical methods for machine learning. Selected topics in reinforcement learning.""Advanced applications of artificial intelligence in bioinformatics, distributed intelligent information networks and the Semantic Web. Selected topics in distributed learning, incremental learning, multi-task learning, multi-strategy learning; Graphical models, multi-relational learning, and causal inference; statistical natural language processing; modeling the internet and the web; automated scientific discovery; neural and cognitive modeling.""Current topics in computer architecture design and implementation. Advanced pipelining, cache and memory design techniques. Interaction of algorithms with architecture models and implementations. Tradeoffs in architecture models and implementations."Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to developing intentional learners and worthy team members. Learning as the foundation of human enterprise; intellectual curiosity; ethics as a personal responsibility; everyday leadership; effective team and community interactions including team learning and the effects on individuals; and growth through understanding self, demonstrating ownership of own learning, and internalizing commitment to helping others. Intentional mental processing as a means of enhancing learning. Interconnectedness of the individual, the community, and the world."Focus on team and community. Application of fundamentals of human learning; evidence of development as a responsible learner; intentional mental processing as a habit of mind; planning and facilitating learning opportunities for others; responsibility of the individual to the community and the world; leading from within; holding self and others accountable for growth and development as learners and leaders."Integration of first-year and transfer students into the engineering profession and the Construction Engineering program. Assignments and activities completed both individually and in learning teams involving teamwork, academic preparation, and study skills. Introduction to construction industry professionals. Teamwork topics include interdisciplinary teamwork, skills for academic success, diversity issues and leadership. Introduction to organization of program, department, college, and university. Overview of faculty, staff, policies, procedures and resources.""Continuation of CON E 121. Integration of first-year and transfer students into the engineering profession. Career preparation, professional ethics, construction research, leadership. Introduction to construction industry professionals including how they interact with engineers in other disciplines. Continued introduction to program, department, college, and university organization. Overview of faculty, staff, policies, procedures and resources."Entry level course for construction engineering: integration of significant engineering and management issues related to construction company operations.  Company organization and operations; construction and project administration; construction contracts; delivery systems; construction safety; contract documents."Introduction to materials and methods of building construction and to construction drawings. Foundation, structural framing, floor, roof, and wall systems. Blueprint reading and quantity takeoff techniques.""Introduction to the materials and methods for mechanical and electrical construction systems and drawings. HVAC, water and waste water, power distribution, lighting, and fire protection. Blueprint reading and quantity takeoff."First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work.Selection and acquisition of construction equipment. Application of engineering fundamentals and economics to performance characteristics and production of equipment. Heavy construction methods and economic applications.Planning and field engineering for concrete and steel construction. Design and applications of concrete formwork to construction. Erection of structural steel.  Emerging industry themes."Comprehensive coverage of mechanical systems, plumbing, fire protection.  Analysis techniques and design principles for each system.  Required comprehensive design project for a major building project.""Comprehensive coverage of building electrical systems including power, lighting, fire alarm, security and communications.  Analysis techniques and design principles for each system. Required comprehensive design project for a major building project.""Energy performance of buildings, building shells, HVAC, electrical and other building systems.  Analysis and evaluation of building performance, energy efficiency, environmental quality, first costs, and operating costs.  Strategies to exceed energy code requirements through the ASHRAE Standard 90.1.""Introduction to law and judicial procedure as they relate to the practicing engineer. Contracts, professional liability, professional ethics, licensing, bidding procedures, intellectual property, products liability, risk analysis.  Emphasis on development of critical thinking process, abstract problem analysis and evaluation.""Team development of construction process designs and cost estimates for transportation construction projects under closely simulated conditions. Examine project sites, consult with construction industry mentors, obtain subcontractor and supplier quotations, and submit bids. Offered in the following specialities:.""Team development of construction process designs and cost estimates for transportation construction projects under closely simulated conditions. Examine project sites, consult with construction industry mentors, obtain subcontractor and supplier quotations, and submit bids. Offered in the following specialities:.""Team development of construction process designs and cost estimates for transportation construction projects under closely simulated conditions. Examine project sites, consult with construction industry mentors, obtain subcontractor and supplier quotations, and submit bids. Offered in the following specialities:.""Team development of construction process designs and cost estimates for transportation construction projects under closely simulated conditions. Examine project sites, consult with construction industry mentors, obtain subcontractor and supplier quotations, and submit bids. Offered in the following specialities:.""Team development of construction process designs and cost estimates for transportation construction projects under closely simulated conditions. Examine project sites, consult with construction industry mentors, obtain subcontractor and supplier quotations, and submit bids. Offered in the following specialities:.""Team development of construction process designs and cost estimates for transportation construction projects under closely simulated conditions. Examine project sites, consult with construction industry mentors, obtain subcontractor and supplier quotations, and submit bids. Offered in the following specialities:.""Team development of construction process designs and cost estimates for transportation construction projects under closely simulated conditions. Examine project sites, consult with construction industry mentors, obtain subcontractor and supplier quotations, and submit bids. Offered in the following specialities:."Summer professional work period. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Professional work period, one semester maximum per academic year. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Conceptual and detailed cost estimating. Theory and practice of estimating construction costs of materials, labor, equipment, contingency, overhead and markup. Estimating competencies and bid ethics. Electronic quantity take off and pricing methods. Assemblies costs, unit costs, production rates. Analysis of project profitability, cost analysis and cost control methods. Value engineering. Life cycle cost analysis.""Integration of previous construction coursework into the planning, scheduling, and management of time, costs, and other resources. Emphasis on preparation and analysis of network schedules. Comprehensive planning and scheduling project. Computer project management applications.""Similar to CON E 381, except students with previous experience attempt projects with larger scope or lead students with less experience.""Similar to CON E 381, except students with previous experience attempt projects with larger scope or lead students with less experience.""Similar to CON E 381, except students with previous experience attempt projects with larger scope or lead students with less experience.""Similar to CON E 381, except students with previous experience attempt projects with larger scope or lead students with less experience.""Similar to CON E 381, except students with previous experience attempt projects with larger scope or lead students with less experience.""Similar to CON E 381, except students with previous experience attempt projects with larger scope or lead students with less experience.""Similar to CON E 381, except students with previous experience attempt projects with larger scope or lead students with less experience.""The integrated delivery of project services as a team, including preliminary engineering design process, constructability review, interaction with the client, identification of engineering problems, developments of a proposal, identification of design criteria, cost estimating, planning and scheduling, application of codes and standards, development of feasible alternatives, selection of best alternative, and delivery of oral presentations."Application of team design concepts to a construction engineering project. Project planning. Advanced construction and project management.Individual study in any phase of construction engineering. Pre-enrollment contract required.Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Provides systematic overview of law, police organization and behavior, prosecution and defense, sentencing, the judiciary, community corrections, penology, and capital punishment. The course demonstrates the role of discretion in all of these agencies as well as the sociological influences of age, race, gender, and social class on criminal justice system processes.""An examination of delinquency that focuses on the relationship between youth as victims and as offenders, social and etiological features of delinquency, the role of the criminal justice system, delinquents' rights, and traditional and alternative ways of dealing with juvenile crime.""An overview of the American judicial process.  Emphasis on specific topics such as application of constitutional rights to the states (particularly the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendments), mechanics of judicial opinions, constitutional philosophies of Supreme Court Justices, decisions of first impression, and the value and scope of precedent.""Extent of our obligation to obey the law; what constitutes just punishment; how much of the immoral should be made illegal? Relation of these questions to major theories of law and the state. Discussion of such concepts as coercion, equality, and responsibility.""An exploration of competing conceptions of liberty in American political thought and debates about how liberty should be protected by the law. Contemporary debates about topics such as health care, drugs, property, speech, religion, and sex.""Theory and research on the etiology of types of social deviance; issues relating to crime, antisocial behavior and social policies designed to control deviant behavior."The nature of crime and criminology; the concept of crime; statistics and theories of criminality; major forms of crime; official responses to crime and control of crime."Introduction and overview of law enforcement in the United States.  Theory and research on police history, function, and organization; constitutional issues of policing; and critical topics, such as community policing, officer discretion and decision-making, corruption, use of force, and racial profiling.  The course illustrates the interconnections between communities, police organizations, citizens, and criminal offenders.""Introduction and overview of corrections in the United States.  Theory and research on probation, parole, intermediate sanctions, prison, inmate society, inmate behavior and misconduct, capital punishment, recidivism, correctional treatment, rehabilitation, and offender reintegration into society.""Introduction and overview of white-collar crime as a form of deviance.  Theory and research on occupational, corporate, and organizational offending; prevalence, costs, and consequences of white-collar crime; predictors and correlates of white-collar crime; and political, business, and public policy responses to white-collar crime.""Introduction and overview of criminal offenders. Theory and research on epidemiology, offender typologies, etiology of violence, recidivism, societal costs, correctional supervision, treatment, and prevention of serious antisocial behavior.""Study of the criminal and juvenile justice systems and social control processes. Supervised placement in a police department, prosecutor's office, court, probation and parole department, penitentiary, juvenile correctional institution, community-based rehabilitation program, or related agency. Assessed service learning component.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than a total of 9 credits of 460 can be counted toward graduation. No credits in Soc 460 may be used to satisfy minimum sociology requirements for sociology majors.""Thematic or topical issues and studies dealing with the sociology of police, judiciary, institutional and community-based corrections, gender/ethnicity and crime/delinquency, criminal and delinquent gangs, and crime and delinquency prevention.""Overview of ways to use educational technologies to support instruction in PK-6 settings. Focus on pedagogical approaches that integrate technologies to support learning in the content areas. Laboratory experiences include development of activities to use tool software, multimedia, web page development, digital video and other technologies to facilitate learning and teaching.""Overview of ways to use educational technologies to support instruction in 7-12 settings.  Focus on pedagogical approaches that integrate technologies to support learning in the content areas.  Laboratory experiences include development of activities to use tool software, multimedia, web page development, digital video and other technologies to facilitate learning and teaching."Introduction to the historical and contemporary landscape of schooling in the United States. Emphasis is placed on topics and tensions in the relationship between school and society (e.g. equity of access to education and competing purposes of education) and the implications of these topics and tensions for teaching and learning in public schools. Designed for prospective teachers.Overview of early childhood education (birth-grade 3) teacher licensure requirements.  Program planning and university procedures.  Required of all students majoring in early childhood education.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Learning community for transition to university community life.  Overview of pre-K to grade 12 teacher certification requirements in Iowa and other states.  Program and career planning.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Overview of mathematics, science, family and consumer sciences and history/social sciences secondary education (grades 5-12), teacher licensure requirements in Iowa and other states. Program and career planning.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to elementary education teaching strategies, classroom management, and curriculum organization. Open to students in the elementary education curriculum or the early childhood education curriculum."Pre-Student teaching experience in area educational settings.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  C I 280 may be taken more than once for credit toward graduation.Pre-Student teaching experience in school settings.  1/2 day of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 2.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  C I 280 may be taken more than once for credit toward graduation.Pre-Student teaching experience in learning technologies in school settings. 2 1/2-hour blocks of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  C I 280 may be taken more than once for credit toward graduation.Pre-Student teaching experience in Native American tutoring in school settings. 2 1/2 hour blocks of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  C I 280 may be taken more than once for credit toward graduation.Pre-Student teaching experience in museum settings. 2 1/2-hour blocks of time needed. Supervision level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  C I 280 may be taken more than once for credit toward graduation.Pre-Student teaching experience for multicultural youth in school settings. 2 1/2-hour blocks of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  C I 280 may be taken more than once for credit toward graduation.Pre-Student teaching experience in mild/moderate disabilities in school settings. 2 1/2-hour blocks of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Pre-student teaching experience in music in school settings.  Permission of Music coordinator required prior to enrollment. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Pre-student teaching experience for secondary education students in school settings. 2 1/2 hour blocks of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Pre-student teaching experience in secondary science in school settings. 2 1/2-hour blocks of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  C I 280 may be taken more than once for credit toward graduation.Pre-student teaching experience for Preparing Tomorrow's Teachers learning community students in school settings. 2 1/2-hour blocks of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  C I 280 may be taken more than once for credit toward graduation.Pre-student teaching experience in art education in school settings. 2 1/2-hour blocks of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  C I 280 may be taken more than once for credit toward graduation.Pre-student teaching experience in English as a Second Language. 1/2 day of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Pre-student teaching experience tutoring in a school setting focused on mathematics, literacy, and/or other content areas. Two, one-hour blocks of time per week needed. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Independent study, under faculty supervision, of a topic in the field of education."Advanced integration of learning technologies into K-12 educational contexts. Students will examine current trends in the use of learning technologies with K-12 students; explore the use of Web 2.0 applications in the classroom; and delve into issues and trends in classroom technology use. Required for Learning Technologies minor."Overview of elementary education requirements, curricular opportunities, and university procedures. Program planning. Required of all transfer students majoring in elementary education.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Psychological theory relevant to classroom learning, cognition, motivation, classroom management and assessment for children from birth to grade 6. Implications of theory for teaching children and for assessing learning in educational settings with young and grade school aged children.""Classroom learning with emphasis on theories of learning and cognition, and instructional techniques. Major emphasis on measurement theory and the classroom assessment of learning outcomes.""The intersection of issues in the history, philosophy sociology, and psychology of science and their application to and impact on science teaching and learning, science teacher education, and science education research.""Theories, teaching strategies, and instructional materials pertinent to teaching reading, writing, listening, and   speaking to children in kindergarten through third grade.""Theories and processes of literacy. Application through reading and writing across the curriculum, integration of language arts, literature-based instruction, and metacognitive strategies."Analysis and application of strategies to enhance students' literacy development in middle and secondary school settings."Awareness and nature of cultural pluralism; need for multicultural education; multicultural concepts and theories; cultural groups - their perceptions, needs, and contributions; problems and issues regarding ethnocentrism, prejudice, and discrimination based on race, ethnicity, socioeconomic class, sex/gender, sexual identity, and language in the school environment; curriculum infusion and transformation, multicultural interaction, design and execution of teaching strategies.""Review of flexible and distance learning (FDL) cases in a variety of contexts and pedagogic styles, identification of underlying principles and frameworks for best practice in this field."Supervised teaching experience in the elementary grades.Supervised teaching experience in the elementary grades.Supervised teaching experience in the elementary grades.Supervised teaching experience in the elementary grades.Supervised teaching experience in the elementary grades.Supervised teaching experience in the elementary grades.Supervised teaching experience in the elementary grades."Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in physical sciences grades 5-12.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Full-time teaching in secondary English: long term and unit planning, lesson planning, classroom teaching practice in English language arts.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in world languages grades K-8.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in English as a Second Language grades 7-12.""Development of a research-based framework for teaching science that includes student goals, congruent student actions, the character and role of science inquiry, teaching behaviors and strategies, contemporary learning theories, and self evaluation.""Advancing a research-based framework for teaching science in a variety of school settings, emphasizing the teacher's role, the development and revision of science curriculum, exceptional learners, content area reading strategies, management strategies, technology and student assessment.""Introduction to research on bilingualism and examination of the social, historical, and political contexts of bilingual education in U.S. schools.  Attention to policy environment, school program structure, mode of classroom instruction, family and community context, and attainment of bilingualism and biculturalism for U.S. Mexican youth.""The curriculum, human relations, student evaluation, support services, classroom management, organization of schools, legal aspects of schools, professionalism, and career planning.""Emphasis is placed on providing appropriate social studies learning experiences (e.g. curriculum content, instructional strategies, and assessment) for primary grade children.""Study, development, and application of current methods for providing appropriate mathematics learning experiences for primary grade children. Formal and informal assessment strategies and instructional methods for diverse learners.""Study, development, and application of current methods for providing appropriate science learning experiences and processes for primary grade children. Formal and informal assessment strategies and instructional methods for diverse learners.""Emphasis is placed on providing appropriate social studies learning experiences (e.g. curriculum content, instructional strategies, and assessment) for primary and intermediate grade children.""Study, development, and application of current methods for providing appropriate mathematical learning experiences for primary and intermediate children. Includes critical examination of factors related to the teaching and learning of mathematics.""Procedures for teaching science to children. Emphasis on developmental implications, teaching processes and methods, current programs, and assessment of learning in science."Examination of cultural relevance in education. Development and application of strategies and techniques for implementing multicultural goals and multiethnic perspectives in PreK-12 school classroom settings."Identification, analysis and correction of reading problems in five areas: print knowledge, integration of print knowledge, oral reading fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension.""Development and application of emerging technology topics related to digital learning.  Series of 1-3 credit on-line learning modules on topics such as grant writing, interactive on-line tools, social networking, gaming technologies, technology leadership in schools, and web/graphic design. Required for the Learning Technologies minor."Methods and strategies used to integrate technology into the reading and language arts curriculum. Use and evaluation of reading and language arts software for elementary classrooms."Application of current methods, and instructional experiences with children in a supervised elementary, middle, or high school classroom while engaged in other methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Application of current methods and instructional experiences with children in a supervised K-3 elementary classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Application of current methods and instructional experiences with children in a supervised 3-6 elementary classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Application of current methods, and instructional experiences with children in a supervised K-3 elementary classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Application of current methods and instructional experiences with children in a supervised 3-6 elementary classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Application of current methods, and instructional experiences with children in a supervised K-6 elementary classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Application of current methods and instructional experiences with children in a supervised K-3 inclusive elementary classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Application of current methods and instructional experiences with children in a supervised K-3 inclusive elementary classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Application of current methods and instructional experiences with children in a supervised K-3 inclusive elementary classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Application of current methods and instructional experiences with children in a supervised grade 5-12 science classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Supervision Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Application of current methods and instructional experiences with children in a supervised 5-12 science classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Application of current methods and instructional experiences with children in a supervised 3-6 elementary classroom while engaged in other elementary methods courses. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Future teachers learn about teaching as they connect theory, practice and classroom experiences. Learning is supported with video-based seminars focused on effective classroom practices.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Observation and participation in a variety of school settings after admission to the teacher education program. Permission of area coordinator required prior to enrollment. (S/F grading may be used in some offerings of some sections.).Supervised participation in a 5-12 school setting. Permission of History/Social Sciences coordinator required prior to  enrollment. 1/2 day of time needed. Clinical Supervision Level 3.Observation and participation in a variety of school settings after admission to the teacher preparation program. Physical Sciences.Supervised  participation mathematics in a 5-12 school setting. Permission of mathematics coordinator required prior to enrollment. 1/2 day of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 3.D. Biological Sciences.Supervised participation in a 5-12 school setting. Cross listed with English 480K. Permission of English coordinator required prior to enrollment. 1/2 day of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 3.Supervised participation in a 5-12 school setting. Permission of World Languages and Cultures coordinator required prior to enrollment. 1/2 day of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 3.J.  Earth Science.Participation in a K-12 school setting. Cross-listed with MUSIC 480K. Permission of Music coordinator required prior to enrollment. Clinical Experience Level 2.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised participation in a school setting. Permission of ESL area coordinator required prior to enrollment. 1/2 day of time needed. Clinical experience level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction to Western philosophy of education. Emphasis is placed on enduring debates about the purposes(s) of education in a just society. Readings include classic and contemporary texts."Planning, implementation, and assessment of standards-based, student-centered, and thematic instruction in the elementary (K-8) classroom.  Special emphasis on K-8 students' communicative skills, cultural knowledge, and content learning."Theories and principles of contemporary world language learning and teaching. Special emphasis on designing instruction and assessments for active learning.Using formal and informal diagnostic procedures to plan and implement individualized reading instruction. Field experience in tutoring and a related research project.Independent Study in science education."Portfolio review. Current theories and practices in the teaching of literature to secondary school students. Integrating literary study and writing. Preparation and selection of materials. Classroom presentation. Unit planning. (Taken concurrently with C I 280, Cr. 2, and Sp Ed 450).""Problems, methods, and materials related to teaching speech, theatre, and media in secondary schools.""Theory and methods for teaching mathematics in grades 5-12. Includes critical examination of instructional strategies, curriculum materials, learning tools, assessment methods, Common Core State Standards-Mathematics, and equity issues.""Concurrent enrollment in 480A; Admission to teacher education and 30 credits in subject-matter field. Theories and processes of teaching and learning secondary history/social sciences. Emphasis on development and enactment of current methods, assessments, and curriculum materials for providing appropriate learning experiences."Educational philosophies and theories of instructional technology. Application of research to the production and use of instructional technology for learning and teaching. Equipment operation.Introduction to theories and models of instructional design. Design decision-making based on the analysis of performance problems and instructional inputs.  Practical experience with the design and development of instruction and evaluation principles."Principles and procedures to plan, design, and conduct effective evaluation studies (formative, summative, usability) in different settings are studied. Opportunities to engage in real or simulated evaluation projects of substantial scope are provided. Create evaluation instruments, develop methods with which to evaluate a product or program, conduct try-outs or usability sessions, analyze the data, report the findings, and recommendations are some of the course activities."Teaching and learning using computers. Selection and evaluation of software and hardware for teaching and learning. Research on computers. Tool software. Telecommunications. Trends in computer-based instruction."Theories, legal bases, and principles of multicultural education. Pluralism and contributing cultures in the United States; presence and contributions of cultural group diversity with implications for educational programs, curriculum development, classroom instruction, materials utilization and development; problems and issues regarding ethnocentrism, prejudice, and discrimination based on race, ethnicity, socioeconomic class, sex/gender, sexual identity, and language in the school environment; curriculum infusion and transformation, multicultural interaction, design and execution of teaching strategies and techniques; inquiry and research on multicultural education issues.""Review of flexible and distance learning (FDL) cases in a variety of contexts and pedagogic styles, identification of underlying principles and frameworks for best practice in this field.""Focus on Algebraic concept explorations and associated procedures. Use of research-based strategies and appropriate technologies to apply fundamental ideas of patterning, coordinate graphing, and relationships among variables into K-12 classrooms. Additional topics facilitate critical examination of K-12 curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment.""Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry explorations with a focus on pedagogical issues in the K-12 classroom. Use of research-based strategies and appropriate technologies to teach geometry in K-12 classrooms. Additional topics from discrete mathematics, history and philosophy of geometry and fractal geometries.""Principles and practices of technology diffusion, leadership and school change. Readings and coursework focus on technology diffusion in a broad sense, and examine more closely how this has played out in educational contexts. Leadership is addressed relative to frameworks and strategies for professional development ad organizational change.""Critical review of current research trends in educational technology. Designed to consolidate graduate students' knowledge of current trends, issues in research, and methods of conducting research in practice.""Strategies for improving problem solving skills across all strands of mathematics (e.g., geometry, algebra, number theory) will be emphasized. Issues surrounding the appropriate role of problem solving in K-12 mathematics classrooms will also be discussed, including distinctions among teaching ""about,"" ""for,"" and ""through"" problem solving. Note: This course is open to undergraduate students, but it is a graduate level course.""Introduction to critical issues facing science education, science education goals reflecting contemporary purposes of schooling, and how people learn science."Philosophy and methods of conducting and communicating action research focused on improving educational practices. Designed specifically for practicing teachers."Introduction to historical, sociological, philosophical and pedagogical foundations of antiracist/multicultural education. Examination of causes of racism, other forms of discrimination, and intergroup conflict from different theoretical perspectives and experiential exercises.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in physical sciences grades 5-12.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in mathematics grades 5-12.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in biological sciences grades 5-12.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in world languages grades K-8.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in earth sciences grades 5-12.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in basic sciences grades 5-12.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Development of a research-based framework for teaching science that includes student goals, congruent student actions, the character and role of science inquiry, teaching behaviors and strategies, contemporary learning theories, and self-evaluation.""Advancing a research-based framework for teaching science in a variety of school settings; emphasizing the teacher's role, the development and revision of science curriculum, exceptional learners, content area reading strategies, management strategies, technology, and student assessment.""Introduction to research on bilingualism and examination of the social, historical, and political contexts of bilingual education in U.S. schools.  Attention to policy environment, school program structure, mode of classroom instruction, family and community context, and attainment of bilingualism and biculturalism for U.S. Mexican youth."Instructional methods and assessment techniques for elementary students struggling to learn mathematics.  Emphasis on current research and practices for at-risk students and students with disabilities."The curriculum, human relations, student evaluation, support services, classroom management, organization of schools, legal aspects of schools, professionalism, and career planning.""Analysis of psychological research theory related to learning, cognition, motivation, individual differences, and teaching techniques.  Student and classroom assessment to facilitate positive learning outcomes.  Adaption and differentiation of instruction to meet individual learners' needs.  This course can only be used for teacher licensure programs.  It is not acceptable for use in meeting the non-licensure M.Ed., M.S. or Ph.D. requirements.""Learning, cognition, and memory in educational/training settings."Current learning theories within science education and their application to science classrooms. Examination of models which assist the implementation of these theories of learning."Critical examination of pedagogy, emphasizing teacher behaviors and strategies, methods of self-assessment, action research, and current issues and trends in science education.""The intersection of issues in the history, philosophy sociology, and psychology of science and their application to and impact on science teaching and learning, science teacher education, and science education research.""Modification of laboratory activities and other everyday science activities so they are more congruent with how students learn, the nature of science, and the National Science Education Standards."Examination of cultural relevance in education. Development and application of strategies and techniques for implementing multicultural goals and multiethnic perspectives in PreK-12 school classroom settings."Analyzing, discussing, and researching the theory and practice of current literacy issues.""Identification, analysis and correction of reading problems in five areas: print knowledge, integration of print knowledge, oral reading fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension.""Instructional strategies for enhancing the fluency, vocabulary and comprehension of struggling adolescent readers.  Attention to content-area reading materials and strategies.""Research and discussion of issues surrounding the classroom use of literature for children and young adults including censorship, diversity, selection, and the influences of technology.""Examination of the roles of literacy specialists/coaches in diverse pre-K-12 schools and communities.  Particular focus placed on current theories, research, standards, and policies relative to literacy processes and instruction, including culturally responsive literacy; processes of successful literacy coaching; and methods of supporting teachers and other school personnel in planning, implementing, and evaluating literacy instruction for all students."Methods and strategies used to integrate technology into the reading and language arts curriculum. Use and evaluation of reading and language arts software for elementary classrooms."Critical examination of the topics central to the study of reading comprehension, including processes, development, contexts, motivation, teaching and learning, and assessment. Reading and discussion of research literature in reading comprehension and comprehension instruction.""Critical examination of current policy initiatives and reform efforts that affect how literacy is viewed, assessed, and practiced, as well as how literacy professionals are prepared for their roles in public schools and colleges.""Instructional methods and assessment techniques for secondary students struggling to learn mathematics.  Particular emphasis on current research, practices, and trends in mathematics interventions for at-risk students and students with disabilities.""Designed to increase awareness and understanding of critical issues surrounding the evolving concept of literacy and examine the effect that technology has on the literacy we use every day, teach in our schools, and need in order to function as 21st century citizens.""A project-based, hands-on learning course. Technology literacy, appreciation for technological innovations, principles behind many technological innovations, hands-on experiences based upon simple systems constructed out of LEGOs and controlled by small microcomputers. Other technological advances with K-12 applications will be explored. K-12 teachers will leave the course with complete lesson plans for use in their classrooms.""Exploration of the historical, political, sociological, and economic factors that engender global inequities. Examination of the definition and origin of the ""digital divide"" and its relationship to the histories of racism, sexism, classism, and imperialism/globalization. Exploration and analysis of research-based alternative approaches to alleviating technology inequities in educational settings.""This course takes a nonlinear, reflective view of the historical, social, economic, political, and legal contexts of the education of African Americans in the U.S. Educational theories and philosophies, Critical Race Theory and Black Feminist Thought form the framework for investigating broad-based, multiple issues of education for African Americans in the U.S. as they are situated in the prevailing dominant views."Using formal and informal diagnostic procedures to plan and implement individualized reading instruction. Field experience in tutoring and a related research project.Supervised pre-student teaching experience in secondary schools. Supervision level 3.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special area.Supervised pre-student teaching experience in secondary science education. Supervision level 3.Supervised pre-student teaching experience in mathematics education. Supervision level 3.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special area."Theoretical and historical perspectives of contemporary curriculum; social, cultural, and epistemological aspects of curriculum theory; diverse philosophical positions and approaches to understanding curriculum as it relates to educational settings."Analysis and application of strategies to enhance students' literacy development in middle and secondary school settings.  Research paper related to a course topic."Theory and methods for teaching mathematics in grades 7-12.  Includes critical examination of instructional strategies, curriculum materials, learning tools, assessment methods, National Standards in Mathematics Education, and equity issues."First of a two-course sequence designed to welcome new Curriculum and Instruction PhD students into the community of educational scholars.  Inquiry into (1) the history of education as an academic field of study; (2) the philosophical underpinings of social scientific and educational inquiry; and (3) the contemporary landscape of the field of education."Second in a sequence welcoming new Curriculum and Instruction PhD students into the community of educational scholars. Opportunities to learn about a variety of faculty research in the department, engage faculty in conversation about their research, and continue reflecting on the theory and practice of educational inquiry.""Exploration of advanced aspects of the instructional design process.  Application of analysis,   design, development and production, evaluation, implementation, and project management principles.    Focus on the production and use of instructional technology with an emphasis on the instructional   design consulting process.  Theory and research in instructional technology provides the foundation   for design decisions."Research on using technology in teacher education programs. Application examples studied. Field component involving relating material from class to a teacher education situation."Exploration of philosophies of science that serve as foundations for research and practice in instructional technology, including positivism, post-positivism, interpretivism/constructivism, and critical theory. The roles of language, nature of truth and reality, and acceptable ways of knowing are explored in terms of their implications for instructional technology design, delivery, research, and scholarship.""Exploration of theories of learning and associated instructional models that are the foundation for research and practice in education and educational technology, including behaviorism, information processing theory, and cognitive science. Emphasis on cognitive and social constructivist paradigms and the creation and use of constructivist learning environments supported by technology."Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research.Selected topics in curriculum and instruction; an analysis of research potential; evaluation of impact upon the profession; implications for additional research."Introduction and practice of basic dance concepts, including preparatory techniques and guided creativity problems. No previous modern dance experience required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to the basic skills, vocabulary, and tradition of ballet with concentration on control and proper alignment. No previous ballet experience required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to the modern jazz style with concentration on isolation and syncopation. No previous jazz experience required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Instruction and practice in basic tap technique and terminology. No previous tap experience required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Instruction and practice in foxtrot, waltz, swing, cha cha, rhumba, tango, and selected contemporary dances.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Advance registration required. Continued instruction and practice in either modern dance, recreational dance, ballet, jazz and/or compositional skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Skill enhancement, teaching, progressions with emphasis on world and social dance. Designed for kinesiology and health majors, open to others."Theory and practice of the creative skills involved in solo and small group composition."Dance techniques emphasizing strength, balance, endurance, rhythmic activity and extended combinations."Continued experience in dance techniques and extended combinations. Emphasis on maturation of skill and artistry. Exposure to a variety of modern dance technical styles."Choreography, rehearsal, and performance in campus dance concerts and/or musical theatre productions.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Technical skills in the classical movement vocabulary. Emphasis on alignment, techniques, sequence development, and performing quality."Concentration on technical proficiency at the intermediate level. Pointe work and partnering opportunities available.Dance concepts within the jazz idiom. Instruction in extended movement sequences and artistic interpretation.Introduction to the many forms and functions of dance in world cultures. Develop abilities to distinguish and analyze various dance styles. No dance experience required."Intermediate composition based on the relationship of movement to improvised sounds, rhythmic scores, and the musical works of composers from various periods.""Study of the history of dance from early to modern times with emphasis on the theories and philosophies of contemporary modern dance, dancers, and dance educators.""Advance registration required. Designed to meet special interests and talents of students to include both group and independent study in various aspects of dance as a performing art including production, choreography, and performance.""Content, experiences, and methods of a comprehensive dance program at the elementary school level. Theories and practice in guiding elementary school children in expressive movement experiences."Methods and techniques of teaching social and world dance forms. Introduction to teaching educational modern dance."Teaching yoga, body therapies, mindfulness and dance composition to enhance the physical and mental performance of the individual."Independent study of problems or areas of interest in dance.Independent study of problems or areas of interest in dance.Independent study of problems or areas of interest in dance for those admitted to the honors program."Introduction to the phenomenon of design thinking as it appears in various design fields, including methodologies of reasoning and problem solving; patterns of creativity and individual style; and the interaction of art, science, and technology.""Half-semester course. Studio projects develop students' ability to generate ideas and communicate those ideas visually, orally, and through writing. Field trips.""Introduction of themes and issues that are relevant to the design fields through theoretical readings, case studies, and visiting lecturers.""Off-campus tours of areas of interest within the design professions such as design offices, museums, buildings, and neighborhoods.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Students will learn to interpret, analyze and evaluate visual materials, use images and text effectively to communicate ideas, and understand issues surrounding the creation and use of images and visual media for design critique. Precedent study and critique of sample student design work to understand principles of visual literacy and how to apply them to the presentation of design work. Emphasis on peer-to-peer discussion and in-class participation. Lecture and discussion format.""Half-semester course.  Studio projects of increasing complexity requiring interdisciplinary approaches to contemporary challenges and opportunities.  Continued development of students' abilities to generate ideas and communicate those ideas visually, orally, and through writing.  Field trips.""Preparation of printed and online portfolio of student work and materials for job search and/or graduate school applications.  Guidance for interviewing, professional networking, business etiquette, and resume writing.  Workshops and lectures."Individual projects designed by students in consultation with faculty instructor and mentor. Demonstration of student skill sets and knowledge of project planning and development."A core design studio course exploring the interaction of two-and three-dimensional design. Emphasis on fundamental skills and ideas shared across design disciplines. Investigation of creative process, visual order and materials, and development of critical thinking through studio projects and lectures. Includes study of precedents, contemporary design practices and disciplines in their cultural contexts."Orientation to the College of Design. Introduction to the design disciplines and studio pedagogy.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Development and clarification of career and academic plans.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Orientation to the College of Design.  Introduction to the design disciplines and studio pedagogy.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."An introduction to drawing through lecture and studio experiences. Focus on creative problem solving and communication in order to give visual form to ideas. Emphasis on perceptual, conceptual, and evaluative abilities through experiences that build eye, brain, and hand coordination. Explorations include drawing from observation and memory, working at various scales and duration, and using a variety of media and processes.""History of designed artifacts, their creators, and their cultural environments in Western Europe and America from the beginning of the Industrial Revolution to the present.""A broad-based exploration of the dynamic relationship between design and culture, employing case study method to investigate particular examples of cultural production in contemporary society. Design processes and design works are presented as culturally, economically, environmentally, historically, ideologically, politically, and socially grounded events and artifacts.""Introductory investigations of various digital design media to develop multi-dimensional problem solving, digital communication skills and perceptual sensitivity. Open to all university majors.""Cultural introduction to host country, introduction to faculty sponsor and program of study, the particulars of traveling and living abroad, and financial and logistical preparations. Guest lectures. Required of all students planning to participate in a College of Design study abroad program for 9 or more credits.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""For students serving as peer mentors for the Core Design Program, under faculty supervision.  Development of teaching and leadership skills within the context of design education experiences.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Opportunity to strengthen leadership, communication and presentation skills.  Introduction to student development theory.  Students participate in collaborative projects focused on prospective design students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Independent educational enrichment through practical experience.  Students must register for this course prior to commencing each term.  Available only to students taking course loads of eleven credits or less."Investigations if interoperable digital-design tools, techniques and methods directed at human scale interactive hybrid design from ideation to visualization, synthesis to analysis, and realization to fabrication.""A structured environment to set realistic learning goals, research potential sites, develop a strategy, develop essential job search materials and skills for finding an internship.  Successfully obtaining an internship either for credit or non credit is encouraged but not required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Exploration of the history, precedents, and practice of public art and public space with a focus on developments since 1970 in the United States and abroad. Course includes development of a proposal for a site specific work of art."Advanced interdisciplinary design projects.Advanced interdisciplinary design projects.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to Italian contemporary culture for design students, including food, religion, fashion, politics, media, and social mores."Advanced interdisciplinary design projects.Independent investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.An overview of diverse research approaches focusing on methods for collecting and analyzing quantitative and qualitative data. www only.   Only one of DIET 511 or FCEDS 511 may count toward graduation."Overview of the fundamental knowledge of financial management, managerial accounting, and operational cost controls for dietetics professionals. Topics include a review of managerial accounting concepts for not- for-profit organizations and for-profit organizations based on the Uniform System of Accounts, value and risk analysis, budgeting, asset management, franchising and management contracts, cost-volume-profit analyses, and operational applications for financial performance.""Exploration of the affects that obesity has on public health, the healthcare system, and society in general. Overview of strategies to prevent obesity across the lifespan."Understanding and appreciating how to communicate effectively in writing about food and food-related topics.  Hands-on experience in research and writing for various audiences and types of media.Addresses wellness promotion through nutrition.  Nutritional risk and protective factors will be examined in relation to public health and individual nutrition. www only."Critical examination of behavioral, physiological, and public health issues impacting dietary and nutritional factors that support normal growth and development.  Content focuses on early stages of the life cycle: gestation, lactation, infancy, preschool, school age, and adolescence.  www only.""Explores influence of normal physiological stresses on nutritional needs throughout the life span.  Evaluates dietary intake and identification of appropriate community nutrition services in on-line discussions.  Specific considerations, such as the influence of age and cultural heritage, are incorporated. www only."WWW only. Basic physiologic changes during aging and their impacts in health and disease. The focus will be on successful aging with special emphasis on physical activity and nutrition. Practical application to community settings is addressed."Examines the physiological, biochemical and nutritional aspects of disease processes relevant to infants and children up to 18 years of age.  Discussion of medical nutrition therapy for a variety of medical conditions in this population including inborn errors of metabolism, food hypersensitivity, obesity, and diseases of the major organ systems.  www only.""Overview of phytochemicals (non-nutritive biologically active compounds) from fruits, vegetables, cereals and oilseeds.  Covers recent findings of chemistry, physiological functions, and potential health implications of phytochemicals. www only.""Examination of nutritional science, food science, regulatory principles, and nutrient metabolism to understand and explain functional foods, nutraceuticals, and dietary supplements. Additionally students will evaluate the biochemical basis, technologies, legal requirements, and clinical assessment in the marketplace.""Overview of the fundamental knowledge of hospitality managerial accounting, cost controls, and financial management.  Important topics include financial statement analysis, cost concepts, cost-volume-profit analysis, calculating and controlling food and beverage costs, pricing, and capital budgeting.  www only.""Tools used to make statistical decisions. Major emphasis on explanation and understanding of important concepts involved; basic theme is understanding of data and methods used to analyze such data. www only.   Only one of DIET 554 or Stat 401, 495, 542 may count toward graduation by students in the GPIDEA Dietetics program.""Integration of the molecular, cellular and physiological aspects of vitamins and minerals in mammalian systems. Interactions among nutrients, metabolic consequences of deficiencies or excesses, relevant polymorphisms, major research methodologies, and current topics related to micronutrients and non-nutrient components. www only.   Only one of DIET 556 or NUTRS 502 may count toward graduation.""Integration of the molecular, cellular and physiological aspects of macronutrients and energy metabolism in mammalian systems.  Dietary energy, carbohydrates, fiber, lipids, proteins, their interactions, metabolic consequences, and major research methodologies.  www only.   Only one of DIET 558 or NUTRS 501 may count toward graduation.""Pathophysiology of selected acute and chronic disease states and their associated medical problems. Specific attention directed to medical nutrition needs of patients in the treatment of each disease state. www only.   Only two of DIET 560 or NUTRS 561, 564 may count toward graduation.""Identification and assessment of malnutrition in low-income countries.  Social, cultural, political, economic, and geographic determinants of malnutrition.  Protein-energy malnutrition, vitamin and mineral deficiencies.  Intervention approaches; international efforts and local sustainability.  www only.""Application of counseling and learning theories with individuals and groups in community and clinical settings. Includes discussion and experience in building rapport, assessment, diagnosis, intervention, monitoring, evaluation, and documentation. Literature review of specific counseling and learning theories."Study of the current scientific literature to evaluate current trends and issues in nutrition science and dietetic practice.  Emerging areas of research investigating the role of nutrients in health and disease in humans will be explored.  Emphasis on the impact of emerging research on nutrition recommendations and interventions designed to promote human health.  www only.Definition and discussion of entrepreneurship and its importance to economic and business environment. www only."Develop skills to partner with patients in making dietary supplement decisions.  Explore the safe, efficacious use of botanicals and supplements in nutritional support of aging, maternal health and wellness.  Discussions on supplementation in the prevention and treatment of chronic disease include: arthritis, cancer, cardiovascular, diabetes, digestive, liver and renal disorders."Develop an understanding of nutrition based on knowledge of the biochemical and physiological process and functions of specific nutrients in meeting nutritional requirements. Emphasis on the relationship of optimal nutrition and physical efficiency and performance. www only."Using leadership theories to develop the fundamental concepts and skills to bridge the gap between theory and practice. Students will be able to successfully evaluate classic and contemporary leadership theories, investigate current leadership trends and identify positive applications in the dietetics community.""Overview of current topics, issues, and trends in dietetics practice.  www only.""A comprehensive review of today's health care institutions and their response to the economics, social, ethical, political, legal, technological, and ecological environments. www only."Principles and issues related to nutrition and immunology. Impact of nutrients and nutritional status on immune responses. Impact of disease states on nutritional status."Grant writing, identifying external funding, managing grants, preparing manuscripts for peer-reviewed publication, and preparing papers and poster for presentation at professional meetings.""Understanding of basic cancer biology and methodology used to study nutrition and cancer relationships. Using current research as a basis, the role of nutrition in specific cancers will be explored. Students will learn about sources of information for cancer prevention programs, and how to apply this information to clinical patient management.""Specialized nutrition assessment and support. Review of energy expenditure and substrate utilization in specific disease states. Current Methods for the initiation and management of enteral and parenteral nutrition therapy including access, metabolic and mechanical complications. Evaluation of nutrition support methodology in selected disease states."For non-thesis option only."Development from birth to age three. Major theories and research on development will be covered including growth patterns, the influences of disabilities and risk factors, environmental factors and their effects on attachment styles, language acquisition, brain development, cognitive development, social-emotional development, and perceptual and sensory motor skills.""Development from ages four through eight. Major theories and research on development will be covered including growth patterns, the influences of disabilities and risk factors, environmental factors and their effects on attachment styles, language acquisition, brain development, cognitive development, social-emotional development, and perceptual and sensory motor skills.""Exploring the role of a professional as a teacher, administrator or advocate in early childhood programming. Students will learn about professionalism and ethics, identifying child abuse, and applying universal precautions. Discussion of qualities of the early childhood educator role, program models, and working with children and professional colleagues.""Important elements for planning, promoting and maintaining healthy and safe learning/care environments, understanding childhood illnesses and establishing healthy lifestyles, first aid, and care providers maintaining their own health. Maintaining safe relationships with others, including identifying and reporting abuse, neglect, and exploitation of children. Exploration of nutrients for life and feeding, food preparation and safety policies and guidelines, food allergies and intolerances, appropriate feeding practices.""Working knowledge of developmentally appropriate practice in child guidance.  This goal will be accomplished through review of current guidance methods and programs in order to familiarize students with successful guidance techniques.  By the end of this course, students will develop their own approach to guidance based upon practices best suited to their own unique skills and strengths."Practicum in Early Childhood Education is an opportunity for ECP teacher candidates to have a guided learning experience in a professional agency that provides services to children and families. It is expected that learning experiences and projects at the practicum site will provide teacher candidates with the opportunity to utilize and implement theories and practices learned in other ECP classes."Exploration of cultural diversity in daily life and beliefs in families with young children. The focus is on U.S. families, with attention to the multiple cultures from which they come.""Application of an ecological model to the understanding of variation in parental roles, perspectives, relationships, approaches, and challenges.""Impact of electronic technology on the development of young children in educational, home, and community environments, and how technology can be used to enhance teaching and learning.  Students will be critical thinkers and informed consumers of technology related to young children.""Curriculum development related to children from birth to age 3: (1) learn and utilize assessment and documentation to inform curriculum, (2) plan and evaluate developmentally appropriate activities, and (3) learn about effective ways to share curriculum information with families. All areas of developmental domains and content areas; issues related to diversity in family composition, culture, and individual abilities will also be addressed.""Development of curriculum for children ages 4 to 8 years: (1) learn and utilize assessment and documentation to inform curriculum, (2) plan and evaluate developmentally appropriate activities, and (3) learn about effective ways to share curriculum information with families. This course addresses all areas of developmental domains and content areas, and issues related to diversity in family composition, culture, and individual abilities will also be addressed.""Students will learn to select, evaluate, and use appropriate assessment tools for children birth to age 8. Students will use assessment data to inform decisions about teaching (environments and practice) and intervention. There will be an emphasis on the ethical use of assessments, validity of assessments, multicultural sensitivity, and assessments for children with special needs.""Knowledge of disability conditions, assessment and identification, interventions in inclusive environments, and collaborations among family members and service providers."Practicum in Early Childhood Education is an opportunity for ECE teacher candidates to have a guided learning experience in a professional agency that provides services to children and families. It is expected that learning experiences and projects at the practicum site will provide teacher candidates with the opportunity to utilize and implement theories and practices learned in other required classes."Exploration of issues surrounding the administration of early childhood programs including identification of community needs, analysis of business opportunities, the evaluation and appropriate use of space and quality programming, consideration of policy and legal responsibilities, and professionalism in the field. In addition, the course explores best practices in staff selection, training, coaching, and supervision.""Professional practicum as a 15 week experience designed to allow the student to demonstrate practical application of developmentally appropriate early childhood teaching techniques and skills, actual teaching experience and developmental feedback. Practicum students will be involved in observation and evaluation of classroom experiences, environmental design, classroom management, and parent communication.""Introduction to key figures and ideas that have shaped the development of ecology and evolutionary biology. Covers major developments in ecology and evolutionary biology at five levels of biological organization: Genome, Organism, Population, Community, and Ecosystem. Impacts of these developments on current approaches to investigation and argument formulation. Effects of technological advances on the direction of scientific investigations. Introduction to analytical skills important for critical thinking in ecology and evolutionary biology and the impact of accepted lines of scientific reasoning on the objectives and conduct of research, such as explanation and prediction, design of studies as experimentation, and structured or unstructured observation."Extended field trip to study major terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Location and duration vary. Report required.Extended field trip to study major terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Location and duration vary. Report required.Extended field trip to study major terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Location and duration vary. Report required.For students wishing to conduct in-depth study of a particular topic in ecology and evolutionary biology.Reports and discussion of recent research and literature.Thesis and dissertation research."Analysis of current research in animal behavior. Topics covered may include behavioral ecology, mechanisms of behavior, evolution of behavior, applications of animal behavior to conservation biology, and applications of animal behavior to wild animals in captivity.""Evolution of ecological adaptations at the individual, population, and species level. Emphasis is on evolutionary mechanisms and adaptive strategies related to life histories and reproduction; age and size at maturity; lifespan and senescense; offspring size/number trade-offs; sex and mating systems; sex determination and sex ratios.""Examination of conservation issues from a population and a community perspective. Population-level analysis will focus on the role of genetics, demography, and environment in determining population viability. Community perspectives will focus on topics such as habitat fragmentation, reserve design, biodiversity assessment, and restoration ecology."Population-and community-level examination of factors influencing the viability of plant and animal populations from both demographic and genetic perspectives; assessment of biodiversity; design and management of preserves."Chemical integration of vertebrate organisms. The structure, development, and evolution of the endocrine glands and the function and structure of their hormones.""Theory and practice of restoring animal and plant diversity, structure and function of disturbed ecosystems. Restored freshwater wetlands, forests, prairies and reintroduced species populations will be used as case studies.""Ecological principles for the restoration of native ecosystems; establishment (site preparation, selection of seed   mixes, planting techniques) and management (fire, mowing, weed control) of native vegetation; evaluation of restorations. Emphasis on the restoration of prairie and wetland vegetation."Physiological adaptations to the environment with an emphasis on vertebrates.Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Techniques. Includes: fermentation, protein isolation, protein purification, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, NMR, confocal microscopy and laser microdissection, Immunophenotyping, and monoclonal antibody production. Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Broad overview of bioinformatics with a significant problem-solving component, including hands-on practice using computational tools to solve a variety of biological problems. Topics include: database searching, sequence alignment, gene prediction, RNA and protein structure prediction, construction of phylogenetic trees, comparative and functional genomics, systems biology.""Survey of land plant evolution; phylogenetic comparison of anatomical, reproductive, and life history specializations. Relationships among bryophytes, lycophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms, and angiosperms emphasizing significant evolutionary changes documented by paleobotanical, morphological, and molecular studies.""Structure, identification, classification, phylogeny, and economic aspects of grasses and related families.""Introduction to the biology and ecology of mosses, liverworts, and lichens. Emphasis on identification and diversity of local representatives of these three groups of organisms. Required field trips and service-learning.""Biology, ecology, and evolution of mammals.  Emphasis on structure, physiological adaptation to different environments, behavior, reproduction, roles of mammals in ecosystems, and conservation.  Laboratory focus on identification, distribution, habits, and habitats of mammals.""Ecological and economical management of sustainable biological resources. Unifying current management concepts and models in wildlife, fisheries, water quality, forestry, recreation, and agriculture. Research problems.""Use of genomic and other ""omic"" data in evolution and ecology. Review of data-generation platforms, computational methods, and examples of how phylogenomics, metagenomics, epigenomics, and population genomics are transforming the disciplines of evolution and ecology."Seminar/discussion course covering the genetic basis of evolutionary processes in multicellular organisms.An overview of the theory underlying phylogenetic analysis and the application of phylogenetic methods to molecular datasets. The course emphasizes a hands-on approach to molecular phylogenetics and combines lecture presentations with computer exercises and discussion of original scientific literature."Ecology, classification, creation and restoration, and management of wetlands.  Emphasis on North American temperate wetlands.""Ecology, classification, creation, restoration, and management of wetlands. Field studies will examine the composition, structure and functions of local natural wetlands and restored prairie pothole wetlands. Individual or group projects.""A comprehensive overview of the theory and methods for the analysis of biological shape with emphasis on data acquisition, standardization, statistical analysis, and visualization of results. Methods for both landmark and outline data will be discussed.""Seminar/discussion course covering the fundamentals of molecular evolution. Emphasis is placed on original scientific literature and current topics, including rates and patterns of genetic divergence; nucleotide and allelic diversity; molecular clocks; gene duplications; genome structure; organellar genomes; polyploidy; transposable elements; and modes and mechanisms of gene and genome evolution.""An overview of fundamental population genetic theory and the ecological and evolutionary factors underlying the distribution of genetic variation within and among natural populations. Emphasis on the analysis of inbreeding, breeding systems, parentage, relatedness, spatial autocorrelation, effective population size, hierarchial population models, and phylogeography.""Principles and practice of systematic biology; taxonomy, nomenclature and classification of plants and animals; sources and interpretation of systematic data; speciation; fundamentals of phylogenetic systematics.""Principles underlying the geographic distribution of organisms throughout the world; biological influences of geological history and tectonic movements; role of climate, migration, dispersal, habitat, and phylogeny on past and present organismal distribution patterns; biogeographic methods.""The study of ecological and evolutionary processes within a spatial context with emphasis on behavior, population, and community dynamics.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""Identification and classification of the common fungi; techniques for identification, preservation, and culture practiced with members of the various fungi groups.""The nature of adaptations to physical and biotic environments.  Biophysical, biomechanical, and physiological bases of the structure, form, growth, distribution, and abundance of organisms.""Readings and discussion of influential ideas in ecological and evolutionary theory, with an emphasis on how models are used as conceptual tools for building synthetic paradigms. Topics are chosen according to student interests; may include spatial ecology, behavioral theory, chaos, community assembly and biodiversity, and others.""Quantitative exploration of classic models and results in ecological and evolutionary theory. Introduction to conceptual, mathematical, and programming tools needed to build and analyze models.""Field and laboratory study of freshwater diatoms; techniques in collection, preparation, and identification of diatom samples; study of environmental factors affecting growth, distribution, taxonomic characters; project design and execution including construction of reference and voucher collections and data organization and analysis."Introduction to the structure and function of natural environmental systems. Emphasis on the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems.Continuation of ENSCI 381. Systems approach to the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems."Advanced studies of ecosystems and the biological and physical factors that influence their properties and dynamics. Conceptual foundations and modern approaches to  ecosystem studies. Interactions among organisms, biological diversity, and ecosystem attributes. Quantitative analyses of accumulations, transformations, and fluxes of nutrients, water, and energy within and among ecosystems.  Global change issues.""Factors controlling species diversity, species abundance, and the structure and function of communities in space and time. Relationships between species diversity and ecosystem process rates and community stability.""Structure and function of aquatic ecosystems with application to fishery and pollution problems. Emphasis on lacustrine, riverine, and wetland ecology."Field trips and laboratory exercises to accompany 486. Hands-on experience with aquatic research and monitoring techniques and concepts.Introduction to major functional groups of autotrophic and heterotrophic microorganisms and their roles in natural systems."Concepts and theories of population dynamics with emphasis on models of growth, predation, competition, and regulation."Research toward nonthesis master's degree.Meetings of graduate students and faculty to discuss recent literature and problems under investigation.Research for thesis or dissertation.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Resource allocation, opportunity cost, comparative and absolute advantage. Supply and demand. Marginal analysis. Theories of production and consumption, pricing, and the market system. Perfect and imperfect competition and strategic behavior. Factor markets. Present discounted value.""Resource allocation, opportunity cost, comparative and absolute advantage. Supply and demand. Marginal analysis. Theories of production and consumption, pricing, and the market system. Perfect and imperfect competition and strategic behavior. Factor markets. Present discounted value."Discussion of material typically covered in ECON 101. Application of economic principles to real world problems. Economic principles and basic business management concepts applied to decision-making in agribusiness operations."Measurement of macro variables and general macro identities. Classical models of full employment. Production and growth. Savings and investment. Employment and unemployment. Money, inflation, and price levels. Operation of the U.S. banking system. Fiscal and monetary policy. Elements of international finance.""Measurement of macro variables and general macro identities. Classical models of full employment. Production and growth. Savings and investment. Employment and unemployment. Money, inflation, and price levels. Operation of the U.S. banking system. Fiscal and monetary policy. Elements of international finance."Orientation course for freshman and new transfer students in agricultural business."Application of linear algebra, calculus and unconstrained and constrained optimization techniques to economic problems. Learning outcomes include the ability to (i) identify the objective, decision variables and constraints in economic decision problems, (ii) represent elements of an economic problem in simple mathematical models, (iii) identify and apply mathematical tools that can be used to solve the problems, (iv) identify the strengths and limitations of the solution method, and (v) interpret the economic meaning and implications of the solution.""Business and economic principles applied to decision making and problem solving in the management of a farm business. Cash flow, partial, enterprise, and whole farm budgeting. Information systems for farm accounting, analysis, and control. Obtaining and managing land, capital, and labor resources. Alternatives for farm business organization and risk management.""An introduction to small business management, entrepreneurship, and economics utilizing a series of case studies. Exploration of issues related to starting or acquiring a new business and development of knowledge and skills for successful management of a small business, with an emphasis on agricultural business.""Basic concepts and economics principles related to markets for agricultural inputs and products. Overview of current marketing problems faced by farms and agribusinesses, farm and retail price behavior, structure of markets, food marketing channels, food quality and food safety, and the role of agriculture in the general economy. The implications of consumer preferences at the farm level. Introduction to hedging, futures, and other risk management tools.""Career opportunities in the various industries and government institutions. Required training and skills needed to perform successfully in different types of careers. Factors important in finding and obtaining employment either before or after graduation including personal resumes, interviewing, and letter writing.   Only one of ECON 292, 292A, and 292B can be used toward graduation.""Career opportunities in the various industries and government institutions. Required training and skills needed to perform successfully in different types of careers. Factors important in finding and obtaining employment either before or after graduation including personal resumes, interviewing, and letter writing.   Only one of ECON 292, 292A, and 292B can be used toward graduation.""Career opportunities in the various industries and government institutions. Required training and skills needed to perform successfully in different types of careers. Factors important in finding and obtaining employment either before or after graduation including personal resumes, interviewing, and letter writing.   Only one of ECON 292, 292A, and 292B can be used toward graduation.""Students complete a research report, based on their internship or approved work experience, that examines chosen topics in management, marketing or finance.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Theory of consumer and business behavior; optimal consumption choices and demand; theory of firm behavior; costs, production, and supply; competitive and imperfectly competitive markets; theory of demand for and supply of factors of production; general equilibrium analysis. Recitation required for 4 credits.""Theory of consumer and business behavior; optimal consumption choices and demand; theory of firm behavior; costs, production, and supply; competitive and imperfectly competitive markets; theory of demand for and supply of factors of production; general equilibrium analysis. Recitation required for 4 credits.""Theory of income, employment, interest rates, and the price level; fiscal and monetary policy; budget and trade deficits; money and capital inflows, interest rates, and inflation.""Theory of income, employment, interest rates, and the price level; fiscal and monetary policy; budget and trade deficits; money and capital inflows, interest rates, and inflation.""Application of economics to issues in sports, including franchising; rival leagues and barriers to entry; cooperative, competitive, and collusive behavior; player productivity and compensation; contracts, unions, and discrimination; antitrust, taxation, and subsidies. Economic concepts include supply and demand, labor economics, pricing, public finance, production, game theory, and industrial organization.""Economic analysis of contemporary domestic and international labor market issues including labor supply and demand, unemployment, and employment in the U.S. and elsewhere; investments in and returns to education, training, health, immigration and migration; income inequality; labor productivity; out-sourcing and global competitiveness; work incentives; compensation including benefits; and labor policies such as minimum wages, over-time pay, discrimination, unions, and immigration.  Examples drawn from the U.S. and other developed countries with reference to developing countries where relevant.""Economic theories of discrimination. Analysis of the economic problems of women and minorities in such areas as earnings, occupations, and unemployment. Public policy concerning discrimination. Poverty measurement and antipoverty programs in the U.S.""Effective use of strategic planning, decision methods, and computer assistance for solving farm problems. Applications of economic and management theory to analyze farm business decisions using efficiency measures to assess current resource use and direct the farm business analysis, planning, and tax process.""Survey of cooperative activities with emphasis on agricultural cooperatives, types of cooperatives, methods of organization and operation, principles, legal and tax aspects, cooperative finance, economic possibilities, and limitations of cooperation. Students will learn how to work together in teams to solve problems while role playing directors of cooperative boards.""Introduction to the process of entrepreneurship within the agricultural and food sectors.  Emphasis on opportunity recognition and assessment, resource acquisition and feasibility analysis for both private and social enterprises.  Students will develop a comprehensive feasibility study for a new business or non-profit organization.""Principles of selling with application to agricultural and food related businesses. Attitudes, value systems, and behavioral patterns that relate to agricultural sales. Electronic marketing, selling strategies, preparing for sales calls, making sales presentations, handling objections, and closing sales. Analysis of the buying or purchasing process. Evaluation of agri-selling as a possible career choice.""Understanding of agricultural commodity markets for grain, livestock and dairy with emphasis on marketing decisions and risk management for farmers and processors. Lab will provide hands-on applications of marketing and management tools via market simulations.""The economic role of governments in market economies. Public goods, externalities, income distribution, and income maintenance programs. The effect of taxes on economic behavior, descriptions of the structure of the principal U.S. taxes, and current reform proposals.""Theoretical and applied analysis of money, banking, and financial markets; interest rates and portfolio choice; the banking industry in transition; the money supply process; the Federal Reserve System and the conduct of monetary policy; macro implications of monetary policy; international finance.""Explanations of causes of international trade and the impact of trade on welfare and employment patterns. Analysis of government policies towards trade, such as tariffs, quotas, and free trade areas. Theory of balance of payments and exchange rate determination, and the role of government policies. Examination of alternative international monetary arrangements."Identify major ethical issues and dilemmas in the conduct of agricultural and agribusiness management and decision making. Discuss and debate proper ethical behavior in these issues and situations and the relationship between business and personal ethical behavior."Use of income capitalization, sales comparison and cost appraisal concepts in appraising agricultural resources. Application of underlying economic/business/management principles, especially present value, as they relate to farmland appraisal. Determination and estimation of economic impacts of special consideration and property use factors. Evaluate feasibility and profitability of investment in rural property.""Theories of capitalism and the economics of transition from a planned to a market economy; the role and the creation of economic institutions supporting different economic systems. An examination of recent experiences of Eastern European countries, the former Soviet Union, China, the European Union, and the United States."Introduction to the models and methods used to estimate relationships and test hypotheses pertaining to economic variables. Among the topics covered in the course are: Single and multiple regression analysis; functional forms; omitted variable analysis; multicollinearity; heteroskedasticity; autocorrelation; simultaneous equations; and dynamic models."Firm location with respect to regional resources, transport, scale economies, externalities, and policies. Measures of local comparative advantage and specialization. Spatial markets. Population location considering jobs, wages, commuting, and local amenities. Business, residential, and farm land use and value. Migration. Other topics may include market failure, regulation, the product cycle, theories of rural and urban development, developmental policy, firm recruiting, local public goods and public finance, schools, poverty, segregation, and crime.""Economic well-being in the context of demographic change, the present and future of Social Security, family retirement needs analysis, investment strategies and characteristics of retirement plans, helping others to work towards financial security, family economic issues for retired persons. Overview of employee and retirement benefits.""Natural resource availability, use, conservation, and government policy, including energy issues. Environmental quality and pollution control policies.""Current problems of developing countries, theories of economic development, agriculture, and economic development, measurement and prediction of economic performance of developing countries, alternative policies and reforms required for satisfying basic needs of Third World countries, interrelationships between industrialized countries and the developing countries, including foreign aid.""The economic development of China and India within the larger historical, political, and socioeconomic contexts. The characteristics of the development paths of major industries. The drivers of and impediments for future economic development. The two economies' connections with the world economy."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Advanced treatment of selected topics from one or more of the following areas: household production models, factor markets, game theory and imperfect competition, general equilibrium, intertemporal choice, asset markets, income distribution, externalities and public goods, etc.""Advanced treatment of selected topics from one or more of the following areas: business cycle theory, growth theory, fiscal and monetary policy, coordination issues, open economy macroeconomics, and financial economics.""Study of the structure of firms and markets and of their interaction, with emphasis on imperfectly competitive markets. Behavior of firms in strategic settings and insights of basic game-theoretic models. Welfare implications of alternative market organizations, consequences of market power, and scope for government regulation and antitrust/competition policies. Topics include monopoly and price discrimination, oligopoly models, product quality, product differentiation, vertical integration, information and advertising, patents, R&D and innovation, and regulation.""Systematic introduction to game theory and its uses in economics. Develops the basic framework, models and tools necessary to analyze games of strategy, including: Strategic and extensive-form representations of games; best response functions and Nash equilibrium, mixed strategies backward induction and subgame-perfect equilibrium, imperfect and incomplete information, Bayesian and sequential equilibria. Examples and applications taken from economics, business, political science, law and biology."Theory of the firm; organizational incentives and efficiency; moral hazard; role of information and decision making under uncertainty; ownership and control; business investment."The purpose and performance of commodity markets. How commodity marketing institutions function. Merchandising arrangements. Distinguishing features of agricultural commodities. Hedging, arbitrage, and speculation in commodity spot, forward, futures, and options markets. Valuation theory.""Rigorous treatment of theories of international trade and international factor movements.  Examination of the impact of trade and labor migration on domestic and world welfare and on the distribution of income.  Theoretical analysis of government policies towards trade and factor movements, including quotas, tariffs, free trade areas and immigration restrictions.  Discussion of contemporary issues and controversies concerning globalization, including multinational firms and labor migration.""National income accounting and balance of payments; foreign exchange rates and exchange rate markets; money, interest rates, and exchange rate determination; prices, exchange rates, and output in the short run; international monetary arrangements; fixed versus flexible exchange rates; optimal currency areas; international capital flows; currency and financial crises in emerging markets."Evolution of electric power industry. Power system operation and planning and related information systems. Linear and integer optimization methods.  Short-term electricity markets and locational marginal prices. Risk management and financial derivatives. Basics of public good economics. Cost recovery models including tax treatment for transmission investments."Description and analysis of economic problems of U.S. agriculture. Explanation and economic analysis of government policies and programs to develop agriculture, conserve agricultural resources, address consumer food concerns, stabilize farm prices, and raise farm incomes. The influence of macropolicy, world economy, international trade, and bioenergy on U.S. agriculture.""Financial analysis of agricultural businesses; liquidity, capital structure, and growth and risk of agricultural firms; capital budgeting methods; analysis of land investments, leasing, and costs of credit; financial intermediation and major financial institutions for agriculture; borrower-lender relationships, and asset-liability management techniques by financial intermediaries; public policies affecting agricultural credit markets.""Theories of natural resource utilization and allocation. Externalities, public goods, and environmental quality. Renewable energy, biofuels, land use change and life cycle analysis of carbon, and sustainability and resource conservation. Methodologies for analyzing natural resource and environmental problems and evaluating resource policies."Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than 9 credits of Econ 490 may be used toward graduationOffered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than 9 credits of Econ 490 may be used toward graduationOffered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than 9 credits of Econ 490 may be used toward graduation"Final preparations for graduation. The final stages of job searching, interviewing, letter writing, and resume preparation. Outcomes assessment information from graduating seniors including opinion surveys, instructor/advisor/course evaluations, exit interviews, student accomplishment surveys, job placement surveys, and comprehensive skills examinations. Departmental recognition of graduating seniors. Life as an alumnus - expectations and obligations. Convocation and commencement information.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Tour and study of domestic businesses, markets, and economic institutions located outside Iowa to expose students to the diversity of activities within the U.S. economy. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Locations and duration of tours will vary.""Tour and study of international agricultural and/or nonagricultural economies, markets, and institutions. Locations and duration of tours will vary. Limited enrollment."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Economic applications of selected mathematical and statistical concepts: linear models and matrix algebra; differential calculus and optimization; integral calculus and economic dynamics; probability distributions, estimation, and hypothesis testing in the analysis of economic data.""The theory of the consumer, theory of the firm, perfect and imperfect competition, welfare economics, and selected topics in general equilibrium and uncertainty.""Models of aggregate supply and demand, theories of consumption and investment, money supply and demand, inflation, rational expectations, stabilization policy, financial markets, and international finance.""Use of numerical techniques to solve economic problems. Numerical differentiation and integration numeric solutions of systems of equations, static and dynamic optimization problems including unconstrained optimization, maximum likelihood methods, general nonlinear programming methods, dynamic programming and optimal control, numerical methods for solving functional equations.""Introduction to experimental economics and major subject areas addressed by laboratory and field experiments. Exploration of experimental methods by concentrating on series of experiments. Applications include individual decision-making, behavioral game theory, markets, behavioral labor, public and development economics, social network, and neuroeconomics. Research project.""Labor supply decisions and empirical analysis for agricultural operators and other self-employed and wage-earning households; multiple job holding; resource allocation in productive households; human capital formation by households, firms, and public institutions, which includes schooling, on-the-job training, migration, health, research, raising of children, and implications for household income and welfare; applications to problems in rural areas of developing and developed countries.""Analysis of labor demand and market determination of wages and employment; analysis of distortions in labor markets due to non-competitive forces, legislation, and discrimination; wage inequality, compensation and work incentives; compensating differentials; microeconomic analysis of unemployment and job search.""Applications of microeconomic theory and decision analysis for firms operating in U.S. and internationally. Topics include demand & supply, consumer choice theory, production and cost theory, short run and long run business decisions, input cost and human capital differences across countries, empirical estimation of demand and supply, pricing, exchange rates, government and business, market structures and strategy.""Team taught by faculty in the Department of Economics and the College of Business, this course focuses on applied economic and business tools for decision making. The topics include: Monte Carlo analysis with applications to option pricing and insurance mechanism design, portfolio analysis using existing standard spreadsheet software and add-ons, dynamic programming tools for inventory management and sequential decisions, discrete choice modeling and statistical bootstrapping, and financial performance evaluation using commercially available software.""Analysis of exchange-traded and over-the-counter commodity markets, their functions and performance. Evaluation of hedging, speculation, and arbitrage strategies. Commodity transformation over space and time. Valuation of derivatives and comparison with derivatives on financial assets. Efficiency and the role of information in commodity markets. Market regulation."Optimal taxation; excess burden; partial and general equilibrium analysis of tax incidence; social insurance; effects of taxation on labor supply and savings; economics of the health sector."Description and analysis of economic problems of U.S. agriculture. Explanation and economic analysis of government policies and programs to develop agriculture, conserve agricultural resources, address consumer food concerns, stabilize farm prices, and raise farm incomes. The influence of macropolicy, world economy, international trade, and bioenergy on U.S. agriculture."Single and multiple equation regression models; dummy explanatory variables; serial correlation; heteroskedasticity; distributed lags; qualitative dependent variables; simultaneity. Use of econometric models for tests of economic theories and forecasting."Analysis of location choice by firms, employees, and households emphasizing the role of spatial variations in agglomeration economies, economies of scale, distance, transport, endowments, amenities, and local government. Models of land use, urban form, spatial competition, central place theory, and migration. Techniques of discrete choice analysis, statistical analysis of categorical data, urban system modeling, and interregional computable general equilibrium.""Theories of natural resource utilization and allocation. Externalities, public goods, and environmental quality. Renewable energy, biofuels, land use change and life cycle analysis of carbon, and sustainability and resource conservation. Methodologies for analyzing natural resource and environmental problems and evaluating resource policies."Interrelationships of natural resource use and the environment. Applied welfare and benefit-cost analyses. Externalities and pollution abatement. Nonmarket valuation of resources. Property rights. Legal and social constraints. Policy approaches.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Unconstrained and equality- and inequality-constrained optimization; the Kuhn-Tucker formulation; abstract spaces; dynamic programming; dynamical systems."Economic theory and methodology; theory of consumer behavior, theory of the competitive firm, supply and factor demand; duality relations in consumer and producer theory, welfare change measures; partial equilibrium analysis, perfect competition, monopoly; choice under uncertainty, the expected utility model, risk aversion; insurance, portfolio and production decisions under risk."Neoclassical aggregate growth models; the overlapping generations model; endogenous growth models; equilibrium business cycle theories; equilibrium job search and matching; models of money; fiscal and monetary policy; income and wealth distribution."General equilibrium analysis, efficiency, and welfare; market failures, externalities, and the theory of the second best; introduction to game theory; adverse selection, signaling, screening and moral hazard.""Topics will be selected from: new Keynesian approaches to business cycle theory; endogenously generated business cycles; models of credit and financial intermediation; mechanism design and time inconsistency issues; political economy models; heterogeneous-agent models with strategic interaction; path dependence, network effects, and lock-in; economies as evolving self-organizing systems."Selected topics in microeconomic theory of current significance to the profession.Selected topics in macroeconomic theory of current significance to the profession."Theoretical analysis of traditional topics in industrial organization. Review of game theory. Monopoly and oligopoly theory, price discrimination, product differentiation, research and development, diffusion of innovation, network externalities, and asymmetric information.""Empirical methods in industrial organization. Measurement of market power. Discrete choice models of product differentiation. Empirical studies of price dynamics, entry, collusion, price discrimination, technology adoption, asymmetric information, and auctions.""Theoretical analysis and applications of strategic games, extensive form games, and cooperative games. Nash equilibrium, correlated equilibrium, Bayesian games, subgame perfect equilibrium, the core, evolutionary equilibrium, repeated games with finite automata, and common knowledge.""Demand and supply for agricultural products, market equilibrium models, implications of government policies on the agricultural sector, evaluation of research and development policies in agriculture, and biofuel and energy policy analysis. Commodity promotion programs, food safety and consumersÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ valuation of product attributes.""Advanced treatment of topics and models in agricultural economics with emphasis on stochastic models. Topics will include analysis of risk in decision making by consumers, firms and farms; analysis of risk management strategies for farmers; the economics of commodity storage; analysis of the impact of biofuels on commodity prices; and models of agricultural inputs and outputs.""Review of decision-making under uncertainty. Portfolio Theory. Theoretical foundations of asset valuation models: capital asset pricing model (CAPM), arbitrage pricing theory (APT), representative agent models, pricing of derivative securities. Complete and incomplete asset markets, credit markets, financial intermediaries, the role of government in the financial sector. Market frictions, crashes, bubbles. Applications of asset valuation models, with emphasis on their testable implications."Theories of international trade; welfare and distributional aspects of trade and commercial policies. Optimal trade policies in the presence of domestic distortions; strategic trade policy; international trade and economic growth.The intertemporal approach to current account determination; non-traded goods and the real exchange rate; fiscal policy in the open economy; monetary approach to balance of payments and exchange rate determination; sticky price models of the open economy; exchange-rate based stabilizations; capital inflows; financial and balance of payments crises; international business cycles."Probability and distribution theory for univariate and multivariate normal random variables, introduction to the theory of estimators for linear models, hypothesis testing and inference, introduction to large sample properties of estimators; derivation of common estimators and their properties for the classical and general multiple regression models, hypothesis testing, forecasting, implications of specification errors - missing data, left-out regressors, measurement error, stochastic regressors.""Identification, estimation, and evaluation of systems of simultaneous equations; qualitative choice and limited dependent variable models; introduction to time series methods and applications, including alternative variance specifications.""Econometric treatment of models arising in microeconometric applications. Methods are primarily concerned with the analysis of cross-section data. Topics may include: systems of demand equations in panel data settings, random utility models of discrete choices, production possibilities frontier estimation, and discrete/continuous models of participation and consumption.""Time-series econometric techniques and their application to macroeconomics and financial markets. Techniques may include GARCH and ARCH-M models, unit-root tests, nonlinear adjustment models, structural VARs, and cointegration tests.""Advanced treatment of issues important in econometrics. Topics chosen from asymptotic theory, nonlinear estimation, Bayesian and robust econometrics, econometric time series, limited dependent variables and censored regression models, nonparametric and semiparametric methods, bootstrapping and Monte Carlo techniques, etc.""Dynamic allocation of scarce, exhaustible, and renewable natural resources, including minerals and energy, soil, water, forests, and fish. Social versus private decisions. Market and nonmarket considerations. Technological change. Regulation. Dynamics and uncertainty."Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Under the direction of the major professor, Ph.D. students write a formal research paper as an introduction to the dissertation research process.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Workshop in economics.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Basic principles of educational organizations, including an understanding of organizational behavior and theoretical approaches to administration. Exploration of substantive elements related to school reform, such as leadership, the change process, current issues in education, and developing a shared vision and mission.""Study of effective classroom instructional practices that reflect current principles of learning. Understanding and   practice of supervisory techniques that support teachers in improving the teaching and learning process,   including skills in observational data collection, data analysis, collaboration, and conferencing skills.""Essential tasks of building-level leadership and management in contemporary school settings, including: curriculum and organizational structure, theory and practice of scheduling, financial management, roles and responsibilities of governance, communication and public relations skills, home/parental involvement and relationships, project and crisis management, technology integration, school climate and culture, effective student support programs such as counseling and guidance, attendance and discipline."Study of principles of transformational leadership and collaborative decision-making skills. Leadership activities that facilitate the development of a school culture that embraces change and school reforms that result in high quality schools dedicated to improved student achievement."Practical and theoretical perspectives on school administrative problems from critical pedagogical studies and research. Exploration of related issues such as cultural literacy, forms of authority and control, and other historical problems of schools in dealing with minorities and culturally different persons.""Leadership theory and practice that focuses on the professional development of school staff to promote improved student learning. Principles of school personnel evaluation; legal issues related to hiring, retention, and dismissal; evaluation models for professional and classified staff; and effective professional development models to support lifelong learning and reflective practice.""Learner needs will be examined from major psycho/social perspectives with stress upon developmental phases of normal growth along with common problems encountered in schools. Issues of racism, gender bias, and socio-economic problems that influence learner responsiveness to school curricula and administrative regulations, routines, and legal requirements.""Generic administrative approaches to the design and delivery of elementary and secondary school curricula including the study of the organizations for learning; cognition and learning theories; validation; concepts of balance; school goals, student assessments and reporting of progress, alignment, and professional development; development of curriculum guides; mapping; employing national standards and benchmarks.""Examination of constitutional, statutory, and judicial provisions as a basis for the legal operation of educational institutions. Rights and ethical responsibilities of school leaders are examined in relation to their roles and responsibilities with boards, other school personnel, and students."Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.In-depth study of administrative topics of contemporary interest and importance.In-depth study of administrative topics of contemporary interest and importance.In-depth study of administrative topics of contemporary interest and importance.In-depth study of administrative topics of contemporary interest and importance.In-depth study of administrative topics of contemporary interest and importance.In-depth study of administrative topics of contemporary interest and importance.In-depth study of administrative topics of contemporary interest and importance."Assessment of candidate skill areas, including communication, leadership, technology, and team facilitation for the development of an individualized learning plan for the program.  Orientation to program expectations and leadership challenges in the context of schooling for a global society.""Alignment of system goals and leadership theory with student achievement, governance, systems thinking, and communication and collaboration with various publics."Allocation of system resources to enhance student achievement; human resource development and negotiations; and coaching and evaluating the administrative team.Mid-program assessment of candidate progress and exploration of leadership strategies for working with diverse populations."General issues of school finance and managing school financial affairs.  Role of the federal, state and local governments in educational finance, tax issues, and structures; bonding; budget procedures; and non-public school finance issues.  Includes attendance at selected sessions of the Iowa School Business Management Academy in May and two additional class sessions.""Accountability strategies for applying leadership theory to student achievement, governance, systems thinking, change agentry, and communication and collaboration with various publics.""Leadership strategies to promote a culture of high student achievement; effective human capital management, including recruitment and induction of new personnel; and effective communication with parents and other patrons."Development of entry plan for creating a culture of collaboration; professional growth plan for first year in new position; and authentic performance assessment of values and beliefs platform."Management of school operations; accountability and ethical business practices; risk management; school plant operations, food service and student transportation.  Includes attendance at selected sessions of the Iowa School Business Management Academy in May and two additional class days.""Exploration of ethical models and practice of educational administrators. Participants develop personal and professional codes of ethics: define concepts of care, spirituality, democracy, equity, diversity, and social justice; and explain how those concepts relate to students' academic and social success. Case studies offer opportunities to consider moral and legal consequences of decision-making. Participants develop their own vision of leadership."Supervised on-the-job field leadership experience in clinical dilemmas of practice.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised field experience in equity and social justice inside/outside higher education.This experience is designed to explore a topic addressed in one of the thematic seminars. The product of the capstone experience is a written paper of sufficient quality to be submitted to a scholarly journal for review."Introduction to social justice theory, research, and practice from a variety of theoretical perspectives in the context of higher education and broader society.""Critical examination of the philosophical foundations of education that seek to challenge the status quo and advance radical educational change.  Exploration of macro-level (and some micro-level) issues relevant to educational change, in relation to how they inform practices of dissent and every day social relations.""Critically probes the philosophical and historical foundations of anti/post-colonial theory.  Examination of policy, social, theoretical and educational issues from an anti/post-colonial perspective.""Exploration of the central tenets of critical race theory.  Examination of policy, social and educational issues from a critical race perspective."Exploration of gender and sexuality in education.An examination of how changes in the interest of social justice have occurred historically in education.  Exploration of social movements and theories of social change."(1-0) Overview of the nature and scope of electrical engineering and computer engineering professions. Overview of portfolios. Departmental rules, advising center operations, degree requirements, program of study planning, career options, and student organizations.""Project based examples from electrical engineering. Systematic thinking process for engineering problem solving. Group problem solving. Mathematical, conceptual and computer based projects. Solving engineering problems and presenting solutions through technical reports and oral presentations. Solutions of engineering problems using computation tools and basic programming."Project based and hands on continuation of 185. Group skills needed to work effectively in teams. Individual interactive skills for small and large groups. Learning to use tools and methods for solving electrical engineering problems."Fundamental laboratory based course in bio-electrical engineering with an emphasis on acquiring and analyzing biomedical signals to obtain relevant information.  Topics covered include an overview of basic medical terminology and anatomy, labs illustrating data acquisition from different body systems, and an introduction to statistical significance and its relationship to biological variability.""Emphasis on mathematical tools. Circuit elements (resistors, inductors, capacitors) and analysis methods including power and energy relationships. Network theorems. DC, sinusoidal steady-state, and transient analysis. AC power. Frequency response. Two port models. Diodes, PSPICE. Laboratory   instrumentation and experimentation.   Credit for only E E 201 or 442 may be used towards graduation.""Mathematical preliminaries. Introduction to signals and systems. Signal manipulations. System properties. LTI systems, impulse response and convolution. Fourier Series representation and properties. Continuous and discrete-time Fourier Transforms and properties. Sampling and reconstruction. Modulation and demodulation. Applications and demonstrations using Matlab.""Frequency domain characterization of electronic circuits and systems, transfer functions, sinusoidal steady state response. Time domain models of linear and nonlinear electronic circuits, linearization, small signal analysis. Stability and feedback circuits. Operational amplifiers, device models, linear and nonlinear applications, transfer function realizations. A/D and D/A converters, sources of distortions, converter linearity and spectral characterization, applications. Design and laboratory instrumentation and measurements.""Introduction to the College of Engineering and the engineering profession specifically for transfer students. Information concerning university and college policies, procedures, and resources.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Integration  of field-specific computational tools for practically solving electrical engineering problems.  Methods for systematically reducing problems into sequential steps compatible with  computer based tools.  Structuring computer programs for efficiency and maintainability.  Integration of multi-platform operating systems and multi-vendor tools for solving engineering problems.  Hands-on laboratory experiences using Matlab, C, and other computational tools."The roles of professionals in computer and electrical engineering.  Relationship of coursework to industry and academic careers.  Issues relevant to today's world.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Structure of competitive electric energy systems.  System operation and economic optimization. Mutual inductance, transformers. Synchronous generators. Balanced three-phase circuit analysis and power calculations. Network calculations and associated numerical algorithms. Two-port circuits. Voltage regulation. Resonance and power factor correction. DC and induction motors. Power electronic circuit applications to power supplies and motor drives.""Fundamentals and applications of electric and magnetic fields and materials. Electrostatics and magentostatics, potentials, capacitance and inductance, energy, force, torque. Uniform plane electromagnetic waves, Poynting vector. Transmission lines: transient and sinusoidal steady-state conditions, reflection coefficient.""Conceptual study of electomagnetism and its application in engineering and related fields. EM fundamentals, EM spectrum, radiation, radiating systems, wireless, modern concepts of physics, quantum computing, transmission lines, high speed effects, waveguides, GPS and other related phenomena will be discussed and explained with the application in mind.""Frequency domain analysis, spectral filtering, bandwidth. Linear modulation systems. Angle modulation systems. Phase locked loop, super-heterodyne receiver. Sampling and pulse code modulation. Digital data transmission, line coding, pulse shaping, multiplexing.""Introduction to probability with applications to electrical engineering. Sets and events, probability space, conditional probability, total probability and Bayes' rule. Discrete and continuous random variables, cumulative distribution function, probability mass and density functions, expectation, moments, moment generating functions, multiple random variables, functions of random variables. Elements of statistics, hypothesis testing, confidence intervals, least squares. Introduction to random processes.""Laplace and z-Transforms, properties and inverses.  Applications to LTI systems and analog/digital filters.  Feedback systems and stability. State-space representation and analysis.""Semiconductor technology for integrated circuits. Modeling of integrated devices including diodes, BJTs, and MOSFETs. Physical layout. Circuit simulation. Digital building blocks and digital circuit synthesis. Analysis and design of analog building blocks. Laboratory exercises and design projects   with CAD tools and standard cells.""Introduction to semiconductor material and device physics. Quantum mechanics and band theory of semiconductors. Charge carrier distributions, generation/recombination, transport properties. Physical and electrical properties and fabrication of semiconductor devices such as MOSFETs, bipolar transistors, laser diodes and LED's.""Principles and practices of biomedical instrumentation. Topics include: the physics and measurement of biopotentials including electrocardiography (EKG), electromyohgraphy (EMG) and electro-occulography (EOG), mechanical and chemical sensors, amplifiers and filters, recording and processing biological signals from nerve cells, muscles and human body, electrode polarization, surface electrodes, power line interference, heart sound sensors, respiratory gas concentration, blood-gas sensors, noninvasive blood-gas sensors.""Energy-scientific, engineering and economic foundations. Energy utilization-global and national. Sectoral analysis of energy consumption. Relationship of energy consumption and production to economic growth and environment. Technology for energy production. Economic evaluation of energy utilization and production. Scientific basis for global warming. Environmental impact of energy production and utilization. Renewable energy.""Multi-disciplinary approach to sustainable engineering and international development, sustainable development, appropriate design and engineering, feasibility analysis, international aid, business development, philosophy and politics of technology, and ethics in engineering. Engineering-based projects from problem formulation through implementation. Interactions with partner community organizations or international partners such as nongovernment organizations (NGOs). Course readings, final project/design report.""Studio-based activity (guided problem-based learning and design) focusing on elements of design, measurement, data capture, and data interpretation. Team building, engineering professionalism, engineering process of review and critique, and presentation. Open design activities that may include working with other studios."Exploration of academic and career fields for electrical and computer engineers.  Examination of professionalism in the context of engineering and technology with competencies based skills.  Introduction to professional portfolio development and construction.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Summer professional work period. Students must register for this course before commencing work.One semester maximum per academic year professional work period. Students must register for this course before commencing work.Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Principles, analyses, and instrumentation used in the microwave portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Wave theory in relation to circuit parameters. S parameters, couplers, discontinuities, and microwave device equivalent circuits. RF amplifier design, microwave sources, optimum noise figure and maximum power designs. Microwave filters and oscillators."Fundamental antenna concepts. Radiation from wire-and aperture-type sources. Radio transmission formulas. Wave and antenna polarization. Antenna arrays. Modern antenna topics. Practical antenna design. Antenna noise. Radiowave propagation in the presence of the earth and its atmosphere. Antenna measurements and computer aided analysis.Measurement of high speed systems and mixed signal systems.  Measurement accuracy and error.  Network analysis and spectrum analysis used in high speed measurement and testing.  Test specification process and parametric measurement.  Sampling and digital signal processing concepts.  Design for testability.  Testing equipment. Applications."Introduction to probability and random processes; Performance of analog systems with noise; Performance of digital communication with noise; optimum receivers, transmission impairments, and error rates; Introduction to information theory and coding: source coding, channel coding, channel capacity.""Construction and evaluation of modulators, demodulators and other components for analog and digital communications. Design, simulate,and evaluate wireless communication systems and their key components. Noise measurement."Sampling and reconstruction. Concepts and mathematical tools in discrete-time signal processing with examples from digital signal processing and communications.  Discrete-time correlation and matched-filter receivers.  Discrete Fourier transform (DFT).  Fast Fourier algorithms. Z transforms.  Design of finite impulse response (FIR) and infinite impulse response (IIR) filters.  Realizations of discrete-time systems and quantization effects.  Multi-rate signal processing.  Laboratory experiments illustrating DSP implementations and applications."Techniques used in modern integrated circuit fabrication, including diffusion, oxidation, ion implantation, lithography, evaporation, sputtering, chemical-vapor deposition, and etching. Process integration. Process evaluation and final device testing. Extensive laboratory exercises utilizing fabrication methods to build electronic devices. Use of computer simulation tools for predicting processing outcomes. Recent advances in processing CMOS ICs and micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS).""Basic analog integrated circuit and system design including design space exploration, performance enhancement strategies, operational amplifiers, references, integrated filters, and data converters."Transmission and reflection of electromagnetic plane waves. Propagation in dielectric and fiber optic waveguides. LED and laser operating principles and applications. Photodetectors and solar cells. Optical modulation and switching."Concepts of quantum mechanics relevant to nanoelectronic devices, including quantization, tunneling, and transport; overview of some of the leading technologies for nanoelectronics, including carbon nanotubes, quantum dots, and molecular transistors; fabrication methods for building nanoelectronic devices.""Half-semester course. Basic circuit analysis using network theorems with time domain and Laplace   transform techniques for resistive, resistive-inductive, resistive-capacitive, and resistive-  inductive-capacitive circuits. Transient circuit behavior. Basic operational amplifiers and   applications. Familiarization with common E E instrumentation and demonstration of basic   principles.   Credit for only 201 or 442 may be counted toward graduation; credit for 442 will not count toward graduation for E E or Cpr E majors.""Half-semester course. Basics of DC machines, stepper motors, AC induction motors, and synchronous generators. AC steady state analysis, transformers, and three-phase circuit analysis.""Properties of sounds waves and noise metrics (pressure, power levels, etc). Sound sources and propagation. Principles of wave propagation in one-, two-, and three-dimensions. Wave reflection and transmission. Wave propagation in rectangular, cylindrical, and annular ducts. Acoustics fields for model noise sources. Introduction to aerodynamic noise sources in aircraft, aircraft engines, and wind turbines. Selected laboratory experiments.""Basic concepts of electromagnetic energy conversion. DC motors and three-phase induction motors. Basic introduction to power electronics. Adjustable speed drives used for control of DC, induction, and AC motors. Experiments with converter topologies, DC motors, AC motors and adjustable speed drives.""Overhead and underground distribution system descriptions and characteristics, load descriptions and characteristics, overhead line and underground cable models, distribution transformers, power flow and fault analysis, overcurrent protection, power factor correction, system planning and automation, and economics in a deregulated environment.""Power transmission lines and transformers, synchronous machine modeling, network analysis, power system representation, load flow.""Power system protection, symmetrical components, faults, stability. Power system operations including the new utility environment."Evolution of electric power industry. Power system operation and planning and related information systems. Linear and integer optimization methods.  Short-term electricity markets and locational marginal prices. Risk management and financial derivatives. Basics of public good economics. Cost recovery models including tax treatment for transmission investments."Summary of industry status and expected growth; power extraction from the air stream; operation and modeling of electric machines, and power electronics topologies for wind energy conversion; analysis of machine-grid power electronic circuits, controller interface, and collector (distribution) networks; treatment of harmonics, flicker, over/under-voltages, filters, low-voltage ride-through, and reactive compensation; relaying; effects on transmission expansion, planning and grid operation and coordination including variability, frequency control, reserves, and electricity markets; overview of storage technologies and hybrid configurations.""Digital design of integrated circuits employing very large scale integration (VLSI) methodologies. Technology considerations in design. High level hardware design languages, CMOS logic design styles, area-energy-delay design space characterization, datapath blocks: arithmetic and memory, architectures and systems on a chip (SOC) considerations. VLSI chip hardware design project.""Application of team design concepts to projects of a multidisciplinary nature. Concurrent treatment of design, manufacturing and life cycle considerations. Application of design tools such as CAD, CAM and FEM. Design methodologies, project scheduling, cost estimating, quality control, manufacturing processes. Development of a prototype and appropriate documentation in the form of written reports, oral presentations, computer models and engineering drawings.""Build and test of a conceptual design. Detail design, manufacturability, test criteria and procedures. Application of design tools such as CAD and CAM and manufacturing techniques such as rapid prototyping. Development and testing of a full-scale prototype with appropriate documentation in the form of design journals, written reports, oral presentations and computer models and engineering drawings.""Stability and performance analysis of automatic control systems. The state space, root locus, and frequency response methods for control systems design. PID control and lead-lag compensation. Computer tools for control system analysis and design.""Computer aided techniques for feedback control system design, simulation, and implementation.""Electromagnetic fields of various eddy current probes. Probe field interaction with conductors, cracks and other material defects. Ferromagnetic materials. Layered conductors. Elementary inversion of probe signals to characterize defects. Special techniques including remote-field, transient, potential drop nondestructive evaluation and the use of Hall sensors. Practical assignments using a 'virtual' eddy current instrument will demonstrate key concepts.""Electromagnetic-radiation principles, active and passive sensors, multispectral and hyperspectral sensors, imaging radar, SAR, thermal imaging, lidar. Examples of applications. Also offered online S."Processing and analysis of satellite sensor data (optical and radar). Provides practical applications in an environmental context.Investigation of an approved topic commensurate with the student's prerequisites.Investigation of an approved topic commensurate with the student's prerequisites."Preparing for entry to the workplace. Selected professional topics. Use of technical writing skills in developing project plan and design report; design review presentation. First of two-semester team-oriented, project design and implementation experience."Second semester of a team design project experience. Emphasis on the successful implementation and demonstration of the design completed in E E 491 or CPR E 491 and the evaluation of project results. Technical writing of final project report; oral presentation of project achievements; project poster.Portfolio update and evaluation. Portfolios as a tool to enhance career opportunities."Review of wave and electromagnetic theory; topics selected from: reflection/refraction, interference, geometrical optics, Fourier analysis, dispersion, coherence, Fraunhofer and Fresnel diffraction, holography, quantum optics, nonlinear optics."Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education programs. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Design techniques for analog and mixed-signal VLSI circuits. Amplifiers; operational amplifiers, transconductance amplifiers, finite gain amplifiers and current amplifiers. Linear building blocks; differential amplifiers, current mirrors, references, cascading and buffering. Performance characterization of linear integrated circuits; offset, noise, sensitivity and stability. Layout considerations, simulation, yield and modeling for high-performance linear integrated circuits.""Theory, design and applications of power management and regulation circuits (Linear and switching regulators, battery chargers, and reference circuits) including: Architectures, Performance metrics and characterization, Noise and stability analysis, Practical implementation and on-chip integration issues, design considerations for portable, wireless, and RF SoCs.""Theory, design and applications of data conversion circuits (A/D and D/A converters) including: architectures, characterization, quantization effects, conversion algorithms, spectral performance, element matching, design for yield, and practical comparators, implementation issues.""Analysis and design of phase-locked loops implemented in modern CMOS processes including: architectures, performance metrics, and characterization; noise and stability analysis; and design issues of phase-frequency detectors, charge pumps, loop filters (passive and active), voltage controlled oscillators, and frequency dividers.""Phase-locked loops, frequency synthesizers, clock and data recovery circuits, theory and implementation of adaptive filters, low-noise amplifiers, mixers, power amplifiers, transmitter and receiver architectures.""Filter design concepts. Approximation and synthesis. Transformations. Continuous-time and discrete time filters. Discrete, active and integrated synthesis techniques.""Introduction to mixed-signal IC testing; measurement uncertainty and test validity; IEEE standard test algorithms; high performance test and built-in self test challenges; new mixed-signal test algorithms and techniques to reduce data acquisition to relax instrumentation requirements, to simplify test setup, to improve test validity, and/or to enable co-testing of heterogeneous functions."Propagation in optical media. Optical fibers. Optical sources and detectors. Fiber optic communications systems. DWDM considerations.Review of static electric and magnetic fields. Maxwell's equations. Circuit concepts and impedance elements. Propagation and reflection of plane waves in isotropic media. Guided electromagnetic wave. Characteristics of common waveguides and transmission lines. Propagation in anisotropic media. Special theorems and concepts. Radiation and scattering."Green's functions, perturbational and variational techniques. Analysis of microstrip lines and interconnects. Spectral domain approach, waves in layered media. Integral equations and method of moments. Inverse scattering. Electromagnetic applications.""Principles, analyses, and instrumentation used in the microwave portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Wave theory in relation to circuit parameters. S parameters, couplers, discontinuities, and microwave device equivalent circuits. RF amplifier design, microwave sources, optimum noise figure and maximum power designs. Microwave filters and oscillators.""Maxwell's equations. Differential equation based methods. Finite difference and finite difference time domain methods, boundary conditions. Finite element method and applications to the analysis of practical devices. Integral equation based methods. Electric and magnetic field integral equations. Matrix solvers. Fast solution methods."Fundamental antenna concepts. Radiation from wire-and aperture-type sources. Radio transmission formulas. Wave and antenna polarization. Antenna arrays. Modern antenna topics. Practical antenna design. Antenna noise. Radiowave propagation in the presence of the earth and its atmosphere. Antenna measurements and computer aided analysis."Microwave remote sensing of Earth's surface and atmosphere using satellite-based or ground-based instruments. Specific examples include remote sensing of atmospheric temperature and water vapor, precipitation, ocean salinity, and soil moisture.""Magnetic fields, flux density and magnetization. Magnetic materials, magnetic measurements. Magnetic properties of materials. Domains, domain walls, domain processes, magnetization curves and hysteresis. Types of magnetic order, magnetic phases and critical phenomena. Magnetic moments of electrons, theory of electron magnetism. Technological application, soft magnetic materials for electromagnets, hard magnetic materials, permanent magnets, magnetic recording technology, magnetic measurements of properties for materials evaluation.""Space-time processing. Multiuser communications, Wireless Communications, Statistical signal processing. Pattern recognition. Coding theory. Multirate communications and signal processing. Signal processing and communications applications."Digital communication systems overview. Characterization of communication channels. Digital modulation and demodulation design and performance analysis. Channel capacity and error-control coding concepts. Waveform design for band-limited channels. Equalization.   Wireless fading channels and performance."Axioms of probability; Repeated trials; Functions of a random variable and multiple random variables: covariance matrix, conditional distribution, joint distribution, moments, and joint moment generating function; Mean square estimation; stochastic convergence; Some important stochastic processes: Random walk, Poisson, Wiener, and shot noise; Markov chaines; Power spectral analysis; Selected applications.""Review:  sampling and reconstruction of signals; discrete-time signals, systems, and transforms.  Multi-rate digital signal processing and introduction to filter banks. Optimal linear filtering and prediction. Introductions to adaptive filtering and spectral estimation. Applications.""Statistical estimation theory and performance measures:  maximum likelihood estimation, Cramer-Rao bound, Bayesian estimation, optimal demodulation, signal design.  Introduction to graphical models.  Hidden Markov models and Kalman filter.  Classical statistical decision theory, decision criteria, binary and composite hypothesis tests.  Error probability and Chernoff bound. Applications.""Review of sampling, linear algebra and probability. Classical image processing topics such as image sampling and quantization, image transforms (2D Fourier, KLT, DCT, etc), image enhancement, restoration and filtering. Image analysis topics including edge detection, segmentation, registration and tracking (uses least squares estimation, EM, Kalman filter). Medical image reconstruction from tomographic projections (Radon transform, Fourier slice theorem and reconstruction algorithms using them) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Basic introduction to image and video compression methods.""Techniques used in modern integrated circuit fabrication, including diffusion, oxidation, ion implantation, lithography, evaporation, sputtering, chemical-vapor deposition, and etching. Process integration. Process evaluation and final device testing. Extensive laboratory exercises utilizing fabrication methods to build electronic devices. Use of computer simulation tools for predicting processing outcomes. Recent advances in processing CMOS ICs and micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS).""Basic elements of quantum theory, Fermi statistics, motion of electrons in periodic structures, crystal structure, energy bands, equilibrium carrier concentration and doping, excess carriers and recombination, carrier transport at low and high fields, space charge limited current, photo-conductivity in solids, phonons, optical properties, amorphous semiconductors, heterostructures, and surface effects. Laboratory experiments on optical properties, carrier lifetimes, mobility, defect density, doping density, photo-conductivity, diffusion length of carriers.""P-n junctions, band-bending theory, tunneling phenomena, Schottky barriers, heterojunctions, bipolar transistors, field-effect transistors, negative-resistance devices and optoelectronic devices."Transmission and reflection of electromagnetic plane waves. Propagation in dielectric and fiber optic waveguides. LED and laser operating principles and applications. Photodetectors and solar cells. Optical modulation and switching."Mathematical formulation of pattern recognition problems and decision functions. Statistical approaches: Bayes classifier, probability density function estimation and expectation minimization. Clustering (supervised and unsupervised), learning, and neural network algorithms. Fuzzy recognition systems. Feature selection systems. Classifier comparison. Current applications.""Characteristics of bulk energy conversion, storage, and transport technologies. Environmental legislation. Modeling of electricity markets. Evaluation of sustainability and resiliency. Types of planning analyses: economic, multi-sector, long-term, national. Planning tools and associated optimization methods.""Power flow, economic dispatch, unit commitment, electricity markets, automatic generation control, sparse matrix techniques, interconnected operation, voltage control."Dynamic performance of power systems with emphasis on stability. Modeling of system components and control equipment. Analysis of the dynamic behavior of the system in response to small and large disturbances."Transient models of distribution components, automated system planning and distribution automation, surge protection, reliability, power quality, power electronics and intelligent systems applications.""Converter topologies, AC/DC, DC/DC, DC/AC, AC/AC. Converter applications to do motor drives, power supplies, AC motor drives, power system utility applications (var compensators) and power quality.""Summary of industry status and expected growth; power extraction from the air stream; operation and modeling of electric machines, and power electronics topologies for wind energy conversion; analysis of machine-grid power electronic circuits, controller interface, and collector (distribution) networks; treatment of harmonics, flicker, over/under-voltages, filters, low-voltage ride-through, and reactive compensation; relaying; effects on transmission expansion, planning and grid operation and coordination including variability, frequency control, reserves, and electricity markets; overview of storage technologies and hybrid configurations.""Introduction to organized multidisciplinary approach to designing and developing systems. Concepts, principles, and practice of systems engineering as applied to large integrated systems. Life cycle costing, scheduling, risk management, functional analysis, conceptual and detail design, test and evaluation, and systems engineering planning and organization.   Not available for degrees in industrial engineering."Avionics functions. Applications of systems engineering principles to avionics. Top down design of avionics systems. Automated design tools."Selected topics in abstract algebra, linear algebra, real analysis, functional analysis, and optimization methods in electrical engineering.""Introduction to convex optimization problems emerging in electrical engineering. Efficiently solving convex optimization problems with the use of interior point algorithms software. Review of linear algebra, convex functions, convex sets, convex optimization problems, duality, disciplined convex programming, applications to optimal filtering, estimation, control and resources allocations, sensor network, distributed systems."Elementary notions of probability. Random processes. Autocorrelation and spectral functions. Estimation of spectrum from finite data. Response of linear systems to random inputs. Discrete and continuous Kalman filter theory and applications. Smoothing and prediction. Linearization of nonlinear dynamics."The optimal control problem. Variational approach. Pontryagin's principle, Hamilton-Jacobi equation. Dynamic programming. Time-optimal, minimum fuel, minimum energy control systems. The regulator problem. Structures and properties of optimal controls.""Introduction to modern robust control. Model and signal uncertainty in control systems. Uncertainty description. Stability and performance robustness to uncertainty. Solutions to the H2, Hoo, and l1 control problems. Tools for robustness analysis and synthesis.""Sampled data, discrete data, and the z-transform. Design of digital control systems using transform methods: root locus, frequency response and direct design methods. Design using state-space methods. Controllability, observability, pole placement, state estimators. Digital filters in control systems. Microcomputer implementation of digital filters. Finite wordlength effects. Linear quadratic optimal control in digital control systems. Simulation of digital control systems."Linear algebra review. Least square method and singular value decomposition. State space modeling of linear continuous-time systems. Solution of linear systems. Controllability and observability. Canonical description of linear equations. Stability of linear systems. State feedback and pole placements. Observer design for linear systems.Linear vs nonlinear systems. Phase plane analysis. Bifurcation and center manifold theory. Lyapunov stability. Absolute stability of feedback systems. Input-output stability. Passivity theory and feedback linearization. Nonlinear control design techniques."Electromagnetic fields of various eddy current probes. Probe field interaction with conductors, cracks and other material defects. Ferromagnetic materials. Layered conductors. Elementary inversion of probe signals to characterize defects. Special techniques including remote-field, transient, potential drop nondestructive evaluation and the use of Hall sensors. Practical assignments using a 'virtual' eddy current instrument will demonstrate key concepts.""Electromagnetic-radiation principles, active and passive sensors, multispectral and hyperspectral sensors, imaging radar, SAR, thermal imaging, lidar. Examples of applications. Also offered online S."Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in electrical engineering.Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in electrical engineering.Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in electrical engineering.Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in electrical engineering.Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in electrical engineering.Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in electrical engineering.Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in electrical engineering.Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in electrical engineering.Formulation and solution of theoretical or practical problems in electrical engineering.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Fundamentals of error-control coding techniques: coding gain, linear block codes. Galois fields. Cyclic codes: BCH, Reed-Solomon. Convolutional codes and the Viterbi algorithm. Trellis-coded modulation. Iterative decoding. Recent developments in coding theory."Information system overview. Entropy and mutual information. Data Compression and source encoding. Discrete memoryless channel capacity. Noisy channel coding theorem. Rate distortion theory. Waveform channels. Advanced topics in information theory.Advanced topics of current interest in electric power system engineering."Advanced topics of current interest in the areas of control theory, stochastic processes, digital signal processing, and image processing."One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to the College of Engineering and the engineering profession. Information concerning university and college policies, procedures, and resources. Undeclared sections: Considerations in choosing an engineering curriculum. Opportunities to interact with departments. Declared sections:  Introduction to major-specific topics.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Orientation for LEAD Learning/Living Community participants. Introduction to college and university resources, tools and techniques to promote academic, professional and social/cultural development and success.  Focus on building support networks with peers, faculty, and staff.  Introduction to core engineering competencies including but not limited to initiative, communication, teamwork, and cultural adaptability.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Seminar for LEAD Learning/Living Community participants. Focus on professional development and exposure to various engineering disciplines through hands-on lab experiences, industry visits and networking opportunities with alumni, faculty, and staff.  Development of core competencies:  engineering/technical knowledge, communication and teamwork.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Peer-mentored review of course topics in engineering undeclared learning communities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Leadership development with focus on global context and awareness of events shaping the context. Exposure to theory of leadership with examples. Necessary characteristics of a leader, and strategies for leadership skills development. Exposure to non-traditional career paths for engineers. Outline of personalized leadership development.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Solving engineering problems and presenting solutions through technical reports. Significant figures. Use of SI units. Graphing and curve-fitting. Flowcharting. Introduction to mechanics, statistics and engineering economics. Use of spreadsheet programs to solve and present engineering problems. Solution of engineering problems using computer programming languages. (The honors section includes application of programming to mobile robotics).""Solving engineering problems and presenting solutions through technical reports. Significant figures. Use of SI units. Graphing and curve-fitting. Flowcharting. Introduction to mechanics, statistics and engineering economics. Use of spreadsheet programs to solve and present engineering problems. Solution of engineering problems using computer programming languages. (The honors section includes application of programming to mobile robotics).""What is engineering, technology and their roles in society? Investigation of engineering methods through case studies of everyday objects. Explore questions about the impact of technology in society. Apply engineering methods to design and failure analysis.""Survey of the economic, environmental, societal, and political benefits and problems resulting from engineering activity.  Effects of engineering projects on human health, social structures, and the environment.  Examination of improvements in economic opportunities and quality of life resulting from engineering activity. Case studies of the effects of engineering activity.""Removing mysteries surrounding science and technology. Identify key concepts from applied science and technology to obtain better understanding on how things work. Review and explain the principles behind the technologies which define our modern way of life.   A survey of broad range of technology could include: cell phones, GPS, radio, television, computers, ultrasound, microwave ovens, automobile, bioengineering and other industrial and consumer technologies.  Common day technology examples illustrating scientific knowledge and applications."Critique of work/study abroad experience as it relates to professional development. Taken the semester after completion of work abroad or study abroad. Written report and presentation.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Role and impact of legislative process, partisan politics, government, lobbyists, the media, expert testimony and grassroots activism on public policy. Critical analysis of context; of claims, assumptions, premises, and evidence of both sides; represented and disenfranchised populations; the ethical issues to develop personal position and courses of action to impact public policy process.""Introduction to wind energy.  Economic analysis related to wind energy.  Electrical power generation, transmission, and grid operations.  Tower, blade and nacelle materials and manufacturing.  Tower design. Construction, transportation, supply chain and life cycle analysis for wind turbine components.""Understanding the complexities of leadership in building an organization, decision-making styles, communication, managing change, building trust, shared responsibility leadership, creating legacy, prioritizing, effective use of authority, conflict, ethics, integrity, transparency, accountability.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  May not apply toward a degree in Engineering"Professional or interdisciplinary work period in engineering or career-related field of a minimum of 10 weeks during the summer.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Professional or interdisciplinary work period in engineering or career-related field.  Enrollment limited to one semester and/or one summer per academic year.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Application of team design concepts to projects of a multidisciplinary nature. Concurrent treatment of design, manufacturing and life cycle considerations. Application of design tools such as CAD, CAM and FEM. Design methodologies, project scheduling, cost estimating, quality control, manufacturing processes. Development of a prototype and appropriate documentation in the form of written reports, oral presentations, computer models and engineering drawings.""Build and test of a conceptual design. Detail design, manufacturability, test criteria and procedures. Application of design tools such as CAD and CAM and manufacturing techniques such as rapid prototyping. Development and testing of a full-scale prototype with appropriate documentation in the form of design journals, written reports, oral presentations and computer models and engineering drawings."Leadership."Vector analysis; analysis of force systems; resultant in two and three dimensions; free-body diagrams; equilibrium; analysis of trusses, frames, and machines; friction, belts and pulleys; shear and bending moment in beams, centroid and center of mass; second moments of areas.""Plane stress, plane strain, stress-strain relationships, and elements of material behavior. Application of stress and deformation analysis to members subject to centric, torsional, flexural, and combined loadings. Elementary considerations of theories of failure, buckling."Experimental determination of mechanical properties of selected engineering materials. Experimental verification of assumptions made in 324. Use of strain measuring devices. Preparation of reports."Particle and rigid body kinematics, Newton's laws of motion, kinetics of plane motion, rigid body problems using work-energy, linear, and angular impulse-momentum principles, vibrations.""Radiography, ultrasonic testing, magnetic particle inspection, eddy current testing, dye penetrant inspection, and other techniques. Physical bases of tests; materials to which applicable; types of defects detectable; calibration standards, and reliability safety precautions.""Application of nondestructive testing techniques to the detection and sizing of flaws in materials and to the characterization of material's microstructure. Included are experiments in hardness, dye penetrant, magnetic particle, x-ray, ultrasonic and eddy current testing. Field trips to industrial laboratories.""Properties of fluids. Fluid statics. Kinematics and kinetics of fluid flow. Mass, momentum, and energy conservation laws; dimensional analysis; flow in pipes and channels. Selected laboratory experiments.""Introduction to fundamental concepts for force, displacement, stress and strain measurements for structures and materials applications.  Strain gage theory and application.  Full field deformation measurements with laser interferometry and digital image processing.  Advanced experimental concepts at the micro- and nano-scale regimes.  Selected laboratory experiments.""Analysis of stresses, strains, and deflections. Torsion and bending of unsymmetrical members. Analysis of thick wall pressure vessels and shrink fit problems. Dynamic load effects, fatigue and fracture mechanics introduction. Work-strain energy methods.""Introduction of finite element analysis through applications to one-dimensional, steady-state problems such as elastic deformation, heat and fluid flow, consolidation, beam bending, and mass transport. Transient heat conduction and wave propagation. Two-dimensional triangular and quadrilateral elements. Plane problems of torsion, thermal and potential flow, stress analysis. Simple computer programs for one- and two-dimensional problems.""Properties of sounds waves and noise metrics (pressure, power levels, etc). Sound sources and propagation. Principles of wave propagation in one-, two-, and three-dimensions. Wave reflection and transmission. Wave propagation in rectangular, cylindrical, and annular ducts. Acoustics fields for model noise sources. Introduction to aerodynamic noise sources in aircraft, aircraft engines, and wind turbines. Selected laboratory experiments.""Introduction to stress/strain, HookeÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s law, and elastic wave propagation in two dimensions in isotropic media. Ultrasonic plane-wave reflection and transmission; and simple straight-crested guided waves. Transducer construction, behavior, and performance. Simple signal analysis and discrete signal processing. The last few weeks of the course are devoted to case studies.""Introduction to Cartesian tensors as linear vector transformations. Kinematics of continuous deformations, Lagrangian and Eulerian descriptions of motion. Fundamental equations or balance laws of continuous media, linear and angular momentum balance. Conservation laws of momentum and energy. Introduction to constitutive equations of classical elastic solids and simple fluids. Formulations and solutions of some canonical problems.""Theory of stress and strain, stress-strain relationships. Unsymmetrical bending, curved beams, shear center. Torsion of thin-walled noncircular sections. Equilibrium, compatibility equations. Airy stress functions. Membrane stresses in shells, thick-walled cylinders.""Fundamental mechanics of linear elasticity, formulation and solution of simple elastostatic boundary value problems. Kinematics of small deformations, constitutive equations for isotropic and anisotropic media. Field equations for elastic solids, plane strain/plane stress and some classic analytical solutions such as Boussinesq, Hertz, Kirsch, LamÌÄå©, and Mitchell.  Stress functions and potential methods and introduction to finite elements.""Fundamental concepts for force, displacement, stress, and strain measurements. Strain gages. Full field deformation measurements with laser interferometry and digital image processing. Advanced experimental concepts at the micro and nano scale regimes.""Propagation of bulk waves, surface waves, and guided waves in isotropic and anisotropic elastic media. Transmission and reflection of waves at plane and curved interfaces. Radiation of sources with application to ultrasonic transducer beam modeling. Elastic wave scattering from cracks and inclusions. Reciprocity principles and their use in the development of an ultrasonic measurement model. Characterization and measurement of material attenuation.""Variational and weighted residual approach to finite element equations. Emphasis on two- and three-dimensional problems in solid mechanics. Isoparametric element formulation, higher order elements, numerical integration, imposition of constraints and penalty, convergence, and other more advanced topics. Use of two- and three-dimensional computer programs. Dynamic and vibrational problems, eigenvalues, and time integration. Introduction to geometric and material nonlinearities.""Introductory boundary element methods through plane problems. Singular integrals, Cauchy principal values, integral representations and boundary integrals in one dimension. Direct and indirect formulations. Plane potential and elastostatic problems. Higher order elements, numerical integration. Regularizations. Body forces and infinite regions. Specialized fundamental solutions, half-plane and axisymmetric problems. Diffusion and wave problems. Coupling with finite elements.""Vibrations of continuous systems. Nonlinear vibration phenomena, perturbation expansions; methods of multiple time scales and slowly-varying amplitude and phase. Characteristics of random vibrations; random processes, probability distributions, spectral density and its significance, the normal or Gaussian random process. Transmission of random vibration, response of simple single and two-degree-of-freedom systems to stationary random excitation. Fatigue failure due to random excitation.""3-D kinematics and dynamics of particles and rigid bodies. Coordinate systems, calculus of variations. Lagrange's equations with constraints, modified Euler's equations, torque-free motion of rigid bodies in 3-D, moment equations with constraints.""Principles of five basic NDE methods and their application in engineering inspections. Materials behavior and simple failure analysis. NDE reliability, and damage-tolerant design. Advanced methods such as acoustic microscopy, laser ultrasonics, thermal waves, and computed tomography are analyzed. Computer-based experiments on a selection of methods: ultrasonics, eddy currents, x-rays are assigned for student completion.""Theoretical acoustics: wave propagation in fluids; acoustic radiation, diffraction and scattering; nonlinear acoustics; radiation force; cavitation; and ray acoustics.""Materials and mechanics approach to fracture and fatigue. Fracture mechanics, brittle and ductile fracture, fracture and fatigue characteristics, fracture of thin films and layered structures. Fracture and fatigue tests, mechanics and materials designed to avoid fracture or fatigue."Continuum thermodynamics and kinetics approaches to phase transformations.  Phase field approach to stress- and temperature-induced martensitic transformations and twinning at the nanoscale. Nucleation and growth. Nanostructural evaluation. Analytical and numerical solutions. Surface stresses and energy. Surface-induced phase transformations. Large Strain formulation.Mechanics of fiber-reinforced materials. Micromechanics of lamina. Macromechanical behavior of lamina and laminates. Strength and interlaminar stresses of laminates. Failure criteria. Stress analysis of laminates. Thermal moisture and residual stresses. Joints in composites."Atmospheric circulations, atmospheric boundary layer wind, bluff-body aerodynamics, aeroelastic phenomena, wind-tunnel and full-scale testing, wind-load code and standards, effect of tornado and thunderstorm winds, design applications."One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Full-time study of English for speakers of other languages. Brochure available from the IEOP Office, 102 Landscape Architecture, or at www.ieop.iastate.edu.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Study of English for speakers of other languages. Brochure available from the IEOP Office, 102 Landscape Architecture, or at www.ieop.iastate.edu."Academic reading classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic reading classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic reading classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic reading classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic reading classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic reading classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic writing classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic writing classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic writing classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic writing classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic writing classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic writing classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic writing classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic listening and speaking classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic listening and speaking classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic listening and speaking classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic listening and speaking classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic listening and speaking classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic listening and speaking classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic listening and speaking classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic grammar classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic grammar classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic grammar classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic grammar classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic grammar classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic grammar classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic grammar classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic Skills classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic Orientation classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic Technology classes for speakers of other languages. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic English classes for speakers of other languages focusing on Business. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Academic English classes for speakers of other languages focusing on Business. More information available at www.ieop.iastate.edu.Customized academic English and cultural orientation for speakers of other languages.For undergraduates: Completion of ENGL 101 requirement prepares students for ENGL 150.  For graduates: Completion of ENGL 101 satisfies the English requirement of the Graduate College. ENGL 101 courses are limited to students who are nonnative speakers of English.   Credit from ENGL 101 does not count toward graduation.For undergraduates: Completion of ENGL 101 requirement prepares students for ENGL 150.  For graduates: Completion of ENGL 101 satisfies the English requirement of the Graduate College. ENGL 101 courses are limited to students who are nonnative speakers of English.   Credit from ENGL 101 does not count toward graduation.For undergraduates: Completion of ENGL 101 requirement prepares students for ENGL 150.  For graduates: Completion of  ENGL 101 satisfies the English requirement of the Graduate College. ENGL 101 courses are limited to students who are nonnative speakers of English.   Credit from ENGL 101 does not count toward graduation.Available P/NP to graduate students at their department's option. For undergraduates: Completion of ENGL 101 requirement prepares students for ENGL 150.  For graduates: Completion of  ENGL 101 satisfies the English requirement of the Graduate College. ENGL 101 courses are limited to students who are nonnative speakers of English.   Credit from ENGL 101 does not count toward graduation.Introduction to the use of linguistic knowledge in computer applications today and the basic computational techniques used in such applications.  The development of these techniques throughout the history of computational linguistics.  How the study of language has contributed to the advancement of technology and how certain computational problems have influenced the way linguists study language."Application of critical reading and thinking abilities to topics of civic and cultural importance. Introduction of basic oral, visual, and electronic communication principles to support writing development.  Initiation of communication portfolio."Placement based upon OECT test results. Persons whose native language is English cannot take ENGL 180 for credit. No more than one section of ENGL 180 may be taken per semester; up to two sections total.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for ENGL 180 does not apply toward graduation.Emphasis on pronunciation improvement and greater fluency in spoken English. Placement based upon OECT test results. Persons whose native language is English cannot take ENGL 180 for credit. No more than one section of ENGL 180 may be taken per semester; up to two sections total.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for ENGL 180 does not apply toward graduation.Placement based upon OECT test results. Persons whose native language is English cannot take ENGL 180 for credit. No more than one section of ENGL 180 may be taken per semester; up to two sections total.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for ENGL 180 does not apply toward graduation.For students who have completed ENGL 180A or ENGL 180B but have not reached the passing level on the OECT test. Placement based upon OECT test results. Persons whose native language is English cannot take ENGL 180 for credit. No more than one section of ENGL 180 may be taken per semester; up to two sections total.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for ENGL 180 does not apply toward graduation."Developing explanations, leading discussions and handling questions in a teaching environment. Placement based upon OECT test results. Persons whose native language is English cannot take ENGL 180 for credit. No more than one section of ENGL 180 may be taken per semester; up to two sections total.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for ENGL 180 does not apply toward graduation."Seminar with individual observation and consultation. Placement based upon OECT test results. Persons whose native language is English cannot take 180 for credit. No more than one section of ENGL 180 may be taken per semester; up to two sections total.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for ENGL 180 does not apply toward graduation."Study of selected examples of drama, poetry, short fiction, and the novel drawn from both British and American literature. Recommended for nonmajors.""Course introduces students to the fundamentals of writing fiction, poetry, and creative nonfiction. Extensive readings in all three genres. Students learn creative processes through writing exercises, workshops, and conferences.""Introduction to linguistic concepts and principles of linguistic analysis with English as the primary source of data. Sound and writing systems, sentence structure, vocabulary, and meaning. Issues in the study of usage, regional and social dialects, language acquisition, and language change.""Overview of grammatical structures and functions. Parts of speech; phrase, clause, and sentence structure; sentence types and sentence analysis; rhetorical grammar and sentence style; terminology. Not a remedial, English composition, or ESL course.""Representative works of British literature from the origins to 1800 in historical, cultural, and literary contexts. Will include multiple genres.""Representative works from 1800 to the present in historical, cultural, and literary contexts. Will include multiple genres and may   include texts that reflect and/or critique the impact and legacy of the British empire on its former colonies, i.e., postcolonial   literature.""Representative works of American literature from its origins (including indigenous and conquest literatures) through the end of the Civil War in historical, cultural, and literary contexts. Will include multiple genres.""Representative works written in the United States since the Civil War in historical, cultural, and literary contexts, with attention to the cultural and ethnic diversity of Americans. Will include multiple genres.""A survey of the history of film, both U.S. and international, from the beginnings in the late nineteenth century to the present.""Appreciation of oral and written forms of American Indian literatures. Tropes and techniques in oral, visual and written texts. Focus on the role of American Indians in interdisciplinary approaches to modern social and environmental issues as expressed in literary works.""Analyzing, composing, and reflecting on written, oral, visual, and electronic (WOVE) discourse within academic, civic, and cultural   contexts.  Emphasis on supporting a claim and using primary and secondary sources.  Continued development of communication portfolio.""In-depth analysis, composition, and reflection on written, oral, visual, and electronic (WOVE) discourse within academic, civic, and   cultural contexts.  Emphasis on argumentation: developing claims, generating reasons, providing evidence.  Individual sections   organized by special topics.  Development of communication portfolio."Basic principles of literary study. Emphasis on writing of interpretive and critical essays. Particular attention to poetry. Designed for English majors."Analysis of how information and entertainment forms persuade and manipulate audiences. Study of several forms that may include newspapers, speeches, television, film, advertising, fiction, and magazines. Special attention to verbal and visual devices.""Rhetorical concepts and processes to successfully communicate individually and collaboratively via written, oral, visual, and electronic modes across a range of business disciplines. Covers strategies for analyzing audiences internal and external to an organization in order to communicate positive, neutral, and negative messages clearly, completely, correctly, and ethically; save an audienceÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s time; and create goodwill.""Theory, principles and processes of effective written, oral, visual, and electronic communication typically encountered in business and the professions. Extensive practice in many areas of workplace communication, including letter, memo, and email correspondence; short proposals and reports; policies and procedures; job packet including letters of application and resumes; website analysis;  brochures; and individual and team presentations.""Practical workshop in writing nonfiction articles for popular magazines. Emphasis on writing, market research, preparation of manuscripts, methods of submission. Major goal of the course is production of marketable material.""Progresses from practice in basic techniques of fiction writing to fully developed short stories. Emphasis on writing, analytical reading, workshop criticism, and individual conferences.""Workshop in writing imaginative essays, both critical and personal. Analytical reading, development of literary techniques. Individual and small group conferences.""Progresses from traditional to contemporary forms. Emphasis on writing, analytical reading, workshop criticism, and individual conferences.""Writing and reading interpretive fiction written by women. Emphasis on stories that embody a female literary life, gender-specific ways of creating characters and conflicts, analytical reading and writing, workshop criticism and shared commentaries. Includes multi-modal projects.""Rhetorical concepts and processes to individually and collaboratively develop proposals for business, governmental, nonprofit, or other organizations and to report on the work completed both orally and in writing. Emphasizes the structure and classification of proposal and report types, qualitative and quantitative research methods, audience analysis, document design, and data visualization.""Fundamental principles of rhetorical criticism. Focus on selected theories for analyzing cultural texts, including essays, speeches, film, technical and scientific documents, and websites. Emphasis on identifying artifacts, formulating research questions, applying methodologies, and understanding and practicing critical analysis through discussion and in writing.""Rhetorical concepts and processes to successfully communicate individually and collaboratively via written, oral, visual, and electronic modes in disciplines in and related to biological sciences. Emphasizes the strategies for analyzing and adapting to audiences in the biological sciences. Covers developing and designing documentation, presenting scientific data visually, and communicating results orally.""Rhetorical principles of multimodal composing in hypertextual environments. Focus on writing according to web style guidelines, employing cascading stylesheets for layout and design, and using principles of information architecture to determine optimal site structure. Final project involves constructing interactive client site using latest web standards.""Rhetorical concepts and processes to successfully communicate technical information individually and collaboratively via written, oral, visual, and electronic modes. Emphasizes the major strategies for analyzing expert and lay audiences and adapting information to those audiences. Covers developing and designing usable technical documentation, visualizing data, and presenting technical information orally.""Theories, principles, and processes of effective written, oral, visual, and electronic communication of technical information. Attention to major strategies for analyzing and adapting to audiences in various communication situations and composing technical discourse including organizing visual and verbal information.  Extensive practice in many areas of technical communication, including instructions and procedures, proposals and reports, website analysis and design, and individual and team presentations.""Stresses master scene technique of writing fully developed screenplays. Emphasis on movie techniques, writing, workshop criticism, analytical reading and viewing, and individual conferences.""Progresses from production of scenes to fully developed one-act plays. Emphasis on action, staging, writing, analytical reading, workshop criticism, and individual conferences.""Study of science fiction from its origins in nineteenth-century to the present. May include study of specific types of science fiction, such as classic, cyberpunk, feminist, or apocalyptic narratives; and may include consideration of science fiction film and/or theory.""Communicating quantitative information using visual displays; visualizing data; interactive and dynamic data displays; evaluating current examples in the media; color, perception, and representation in graphs; interpreting data displays."Principles of film art and the traditional vocabulary of literature as applied to film. Influence of film on modes of thought and behavior."Study of selected texts of literary criticism, with attention to the purposes and practices of criticism.""Historical and thematic survey of literature by and about women. May include autobiographies, journals, letters, poetry, fiction, and drama.""Literature of American Indian women writers which examines their social, political, and cultural roles in the United States. Exploration of American Indian women's literary, philosophical, and artistic works aimed at recovering elements of identity, redescribing stereotypes, resisting colonization, and constructing femininity.""An introduction to the literature of Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans and other Latino/a sub-groups. Special emphasis on themes such as ethnic relations and comparisons with EuroAmerican literary traditions.""Literature by women and/or dealing with the images of women, e.g., study of individual authors or related schools of authors; exploration of specific themes or genres in women's literature; analysis of recurrent images of women in literature."Survey of literature by Native Americans from pre-Columbian tales and songs to contemporary novels and poetry."Literature by African Americans, which may include study of individual authors, movements, themes, genres.""Literature by writers from U.S. multicultural groups. May include literature of several groups or focus upon one of the following: Asian Americans, African Americans, Latino/a Americans, American Indians.""Ideas about the relationship between rhetoric and society in contemporary and historical contexts. An exploration of classical and contemporary rhetorical theories in relation to selected topics that may include politics, gender, race, ethics, education, science, or technology."Literary portrayals of gay and lesbian lives and relationships from many different genres.  Attention to changing definitions and representations of sexual orientation and gender identity over time."Representative works from the drama, epics, poetry, and prose of the Ancient World through the late sixteenth century. May include Homer, Aeschylus, Sappho, Catullus, Dante, Marie de France, Boccaccio, Christine de Pizan, Cervantes, and others.""Global literatures in their various cultural and aesthetic contexts. Representative works, oral and written literature, including poetry,   fiction, nonfiction, and drama.""Study of literary texts that address the following topics, among others: the relationship between people and natural/urban environments, ecocriticism, and the importance of place in the literary imagination.""Study of traditional fairytales, myths, and legends from diverse cultures.""Selected readings in American literature from its beginnings through the colonial period; may reflect themes, genres, or social and cultural contexts.""Selected readings in American literature of the 19th century; may reflect themes, genres, or social and cultural contexts.""Selected readings in American literature since 1900; may reflect themes, genres, or social and cultural contexts."Reading and analysis of selected plays. Development of Shakespeare's dramatic art in its social and intellectual context."Selected readings in medieval literature from its beginnings through the fifteenth century; may reflect themes, genres, or social and cultural contexts.""Selected readings in British literature from 1660 to 1800; may reflect themes, genres, or social and cultural contexts.""Selected readings from British literature from the late eighteenth century to about 1900; may reflect themes, genres, or social and cultural contexts.""Selected readings from British literature from the late eighteenth century to about 1900; may reflect themes, genres, or social and cultural contexts.""Selected readings from British literature from the late eighteenth century to about 1900; may reflect themes, genres, or social and cultural contexts.""Historical, thematic and theoretical study of postcolonial literatures from one or more of the following areas: Africa, South Asia, the Caribbean, and the Middle East. Irish and immigrant British writers may also be included.""Origin and development of English and American children's literature through the early twentieth century. Special emphasis on     nature, structure, and enduring themes of fantasy literature."Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply."Critical study and evaluation of themes, genres, and cultures found in young adult literature.  Strategies of effective reading; instructional strategies including discussion techniques and use of technology; matching texts to reader needs and proficiencies. Evaluation of fiction, nonfiction, and media-based materials for use in school programs. Lesson planning.""Introduction to teaching secondary language arts. Current theories and practices in the teaching of writing to secondary school students. Theories of rhetoric, approaches to teaching, lesson design and planning. Evaluating writing. Professional portfolio preparation.""Individual projects in short fiction on a workshop and conference basis. Readings in short fiction. Discussion of elements of narrative such as plot, point of view, characterization, theme, setting.""Individual projects in memoir, immersion journalism, character studies, and/or the personal essay on a workshop and conference basis. Readings in creative nonfiction.""Individual projects in poetry on a workshop and conference basis. Readings in poetry. Discussion of poetic elements such as image, sound, internal structure, rhythm, tone, figurative language.""Seminar course on the implication of technologies, especially computer technology, for the writing and reading of business,   technical, and academic texts. Extensive reading, discussion, and writing on selected technology-related topics.""Editing concepts and processes for choosing the appropriate level of editing for the particular rhetorical situation. Covers using editorial tools such as copy-marking symbols, developing style sheets and guides, and managing document production. Emphasizes developing an editorial eye for verbal and visual details in order to achieve accuracy, consistency, correctness, and completeness.""Rhetorical strategies and perceptual principles for designing print and digital visual elements such as diagrams and graphs and integrating those visual elements into business and technical communications. Covers strategies for employing visual elements such as typeface, page and screen layout, and illustrations in order to make communications more usable.""Full-time teaching in content licensure area: long term and unit planning, lesson planning, classroom teaching practice.""Full-time teaching in secondary English: long term and unit planning, lesson planning, classroom teaching practice in English language arts."Advanced seminar in theory and analysis with extensive practice in various modes of argument."Comparison of English to other languages by family background and by type.  Analysis of representative Old, Middle, Early Modern   and present-day English texts, including both literary works and non-literary documents."The ways men and women differ in using language in varied settings and the ways in which language both creates and reflects gender divisions.The process of second language learning and principles and techniques of teaching second languages. Learning and teaching in specific situations and for particular purposes. Current applications of technology in teaching and assessment.Theories and methods for analysis of syntax and morphology."Selected authors, movements, eras, or genres in British literature. Readings in criticism; required research paper.""Selected authors, movements, eras, or genres in American literature. Readings in criticism; required research paper.""Intensive study of selected literature that bridges traditional genre, period, national, or disciplinary boundaries.  Readings in   criticism; required research paper.""Intensive study of drama, film, fiction, poetry, or prose.  Selected movements, eras, or national traditions. Readings in criticism;   required research paper.""Selected readings of various authors, movements, eras, or genres. Readings in criticism; required research paper."Intensive study of a selected topic that bridges theory and practice in technical communication. Required project that contributes to the understanding of an emerging issue in the profession."An opportunity to write, edit, and design business and technical documents in a professional setting. Projects might include reports, proposals, manuals, brochures, newsletters."Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered or who desire to integrate a study of literature or language with special problems in major fields.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.Teaching assistant experience."Advanced workshop of individual creative writing projects in short fiction, nonfiction, and poetry. Readings and discussion of published examples of short fiction, nonfiction, and poetry by authors of national and international note. Extensive discussion and written analysis of elements of craft across genres.""Portfolio review. Current theories and practices in the teaching of literature to secondary school students. Integrating literary study and writing. Preparation and selection of materials. Classroom presentation. Unit planning. (Taken concurrently with C I 280, Cr. 2, and Sp Ed 450)."Must be taken in conjunction with a 400-level English course."Required of all new English teaching assistants teaching ISUComm Foundation Courses. Introduction to the teaching of ISUComm Foundation Courses. Foundational and relevant newer composition theory and pedagogical methods related to ISUComm Foundation Courses objectives and their classroom enactment, including development of assignments and supporting activities, and evaluation of student projects."Survey of the major qualitative and quantitative methods used in research on communication and language in academic and nonacademic settings.In-depth consideration of the theory and practice of composition pedagogy. Opportunities for actual classroom application."Teaching business and technical communication in university, community college, and industry settings. Emphasizes curriculum planning, materials development, assignment design, responding to student work, assessment of student work, and distance (online) teaching.""Seminar course examining the role of technology, especially computer technology, in communication practices within academic and workplace settings.""Introduction to professional communication as a discipline, with emphasis on theories of communication and discourse that inform professional communication research and on trends and developments in that research and the field.""Introduction to the theory and practice of planning, preparing, and presenting information in written, oral, and visual forms prepared for business, science, industry, and government. Guided readings. Team projects. Individual projects.""Hands-on practice in writing academic discourse for publication; rhetorical analyses of student-selected academic journals; discussion of current trends in academic writing; professional perspectives on the referee process and on journal editorial decision making. Focus on the writing of selected short pieces (opinion essays, standard reviews, conference-length papers) and of article-length manuscripts.""Introduction to the theory and practice of preparing and analyzing proposals and grant applications intended for businesses, governmental agencies, and/or private and corporate foundations. Individual assignments and group projects include text documents and oral presentations.""Use of software and web applications for language teaching, linguistic analysis, and statistical analysis. Issues and problems in applied linguistics related to computer methods.""Principles and methods of linguistic analysis with emphasis on phonology, morphology, and syntax. Description of linguistic variation and current theoretical approaches to linguistics.""Theory, methods, and results of second language acquisition research with emphasis on approaches relevant to second language teaching."Advanced practicum in language assessment."Theories and methods of examining language in its social setting. Analysis of individual characteristics (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity, social class, region), interactional factors (e.g., situation, topic, purpose) and national policies affecting language use.""Introduction to computational techniques involving human language and speech in applications such as information retrieval and extraction, automatic text categorization, word prediction, intelligent Web searching, spelling and grammar checking, speech recognition and synthesis, statistical machine translation, n-grams, POS-tagging, word-sense disambiguation, on-line lexicons and thesauri, markup languages, corpus analysis, and Python programming language."Data and knowledge structures for formal representation of natural language and speech data. Designing and implementing algorithms for automating linguistic analysis tasks. Conceptual issues for natural language and speech processing programming."Introduction to approaches, methods, techniques, materials, curricular design, and assessment for various levels of ESL instruction. Attention to issues related to the teaching of listening, speaking, reading, writing, vocabulary, pronunciation, and culture.""Principles of second language assessment including reliability, validity, authenticity and practicality. Constructing, scoring,   interpreting, and evaluating second language tests for a variety of situations."Concepts and practices for analysis of English by computer with emphasis on the applications of computational analysis to problems   in applied linguistics such as corpus analysis and recognition of learner language in computer-assisted learning and language   assessment."Examination of the roles of the literary work, reader, and teacher in literary study. Responses to literature. Place of literature in language arts. Study and development of curriculum materials for middle school, high school, and college levels of instruction.""Examination of the history, logic, and rhetoric of contemporary literary criticism and analysis.""Introductory study of Old English language and literature in prose and poetry, including extracts from Beowulf. Some attention to Anglo-Saxon culture.""Theoretical and practical issues and techniques in the teaching of literacy in a variety of contexts, involving children and adults at basic skill levels and teens and adults in academic and vocational programs.""Theoretical and practical issues and techniques in the teaching of second language pronunciation, listening, and speaking skills. Topics will be relevant to those intending to teach in various contexts involving both K-12 and adult learners.""Theory, research, and practice in computer use for teaching nonnative speakers of English. Methods for planning and evaluating computer-based learning activities.""Methods and theoretical foundations for linguistic approaches to discourse analysis. Applications of discourse analysis to the study of texts in a variety of settings, including academic and research contexts.""Issues and techniques in analyzing, teaching, and assessing English for specific purposes. Topics include theories of specific purpose language use, analysis of learner needs in target language contexts, and corpus-informed syllabus and materials development for teaching and assessment.""Strategies for developing and delivering multimodal content via digital media. Focus on the principles of database design, interface development, usability testing, and collaborative content management within professional communication settings.""Intensive study of literary genres, periods, movements, or themes; e.g., Literature and Historicism, Narrating the Feminine, Allegory.""Selected texts in American literature from Beginnings to the Civil War. Study may include Native American literature, the literature of European conquest, Colonial and Revolutionary periods, Early Republic, and Jacksonian Era, in critical and cultural contexts.""Selected texts from the Medieval, Renaissance, Restoration, Eighteenth-Century, and/or Romantic periods, in critical and cultural contexts.""Selected texts in American literature from the Civil War to the present. Study may include Realism, Naturalism, Modernism, and Postmodernism, with significant attention to race/ethnicity, gender, and identity, and to contemporary critical views. Range of authors and genres.""Selected texts from the Victorian, Edwardian, Modernist, and/or Contemporary periods, in critical and cultural contexts.""Corpus-informed analysis of syntax in authentic writing and speech, with emphasis on approaches used in applied linguistics: rationalist, empirical, functional, cognitive, and pedagogical."Selected fiction writers in English; range of authors and genres. Emphasis on both male and female writers; attention to the relationships between fiction and cultural change."Selected poets writing in English, considered in representative groups.""Primary texts in dramatic genres from various literary periods, in critical and cultural contexts. Frequently concentrates on the English Renaissance and the Shakespearean stage.""Study of lifewriting, e.g., autobiography, biography, memoir, cross-genre writing, autobiographical criticism. Readings may be arranged by period, nationality, or subgenre (e.g., autobiography of childhood experience, celebrity auto/biography).""Overview of the principles of desktop publishing as practiced in the field of technical communication. Focus on theories of print document design and project management, as well as digital prepress techniques employed to produce documents using external print services. Requires extensive use of current desktop publishing software.""Intensive study of environmental literary genres, periods, figures, movements, or themes: e.g., Ecofeminism, Imagining Natural Disaster, Material Ecocriticism, Environmental Justice, Posthumanism.""Primary texts by women writers; historical, thematic, formal, or theoretical approaches; secondary readings; e.g., Nineteenth-Century Women Writers; American Women's Personal Narratives; Southern Women Writers of the U.S.""Intensive study of current and emerging topics and problems concerning literature and its relationship to theory and to language study; e.g., Theory of Metaphor; Renegotiating the Canon; Feminist Theory.""Rhetorical theory from the classical period of ancient Greece and Rome through the Middle Ages to the early Renaissance; attention to its relation to the nature of knowledge, communication, practice, and pedagogy.""Rhetorical theory from the early modern period (Bacon, Descartes, and Locke) to the present; attention to its relation to the nature of knowledge, communication practice, and pedagogy.""Rhetorical principles of information-based multimedia design. Practical understanding of computer applications used in multimedia development. Focus on theoretical and practical elements of producing multimedia training programs in both education and industry. Work with interactive hypertext, digital audio, and non-linear video editing.""A multigenre craft course required of all incoming students in the MFA Program in Creative Writing and Environment. Students develop an understanding of craft and environmental writing across genres (poetry, fiction, nonfiction) as well as learn about editing and publication practice through the lens of a working literary journal, ""Flyway: A Journal of Writing and Environment."" Other course activities include presentations on the production practices of leading literary journals, individual editing projects, pragmatic tips for finding publication outlets for polished creative work, and a field trip to publishing houses.""An advanced multi-genre creative writing workshop. Students work intensively on book-length manuscripts of fiction, creative nonfiction, or poetry.""Individual projects in fiction on a workshop and conference basis. Readings in short fiction. Discussion of elements of narrative such as plot, point of view, characterization, theme, setting.""Individual projects in memoir, immersion journalism, character studies, and/or the personal essay on a workshop and conference basis. Readings in creative nonfiction.""Individual projects in poetry on a workshop and conference basis. Readings in poetry. Discussion of poetic elements such as image, sound, internal structure, rhythm, tone, figurative language.""Special topics course on ideas, issues, and techniques in creative writing. Subject matter may include specific genres, aspects of the creative writing process, or themes of particular interest. Significant readings and written work required; previous workshop experience helpful.""Pedagogical approaches that are effective for grade-school through adult-education creative writing teaching. Writing exercises, workshops, text evaluation, and visits from creative writers."Students assist in an introductory creative writing class. Some supervised teaching but mainly evaluation of submissions and individual conferences. Requirements and grades determined by participating instructors."Students spend a term on a project that requires fieldwork. Projects might include working for a federal, state, or private non-profit environmental organization or farm, or living and working in a specified natural area."Extended practice in close textual analysis of various kinds of rhetorical artifacts. Attention to important theoretical concepts used in rhetorical analysis and to historical controversies over the scope and function of rhetorical analysis."Rhetorical theory and research in graphics, document design, and related principles of visual communication. Methods of designing texts, data displays, illustrations, and other visual elements in business and technical communication.""An opportunity to write, edit, and design business and technical documents in a professional setting."Intensive observation of ESL instruction and supervised practice in teaching learners of English in a context appropriate to the student teacher's goals.   ENGL 588 cannot be used for teacher licensure and cannot be taken during student teaching."Students assume editorial duties for ""Flyway: A Journal of Writing and Environment,"" a nationally distributed literary journal: overseeing a staff, screening submissions, corresponding with authors, editing and proofing, assisting with layout, communicating with the printer, overseeing a contest, and promoting the magazine."Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition.Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition.Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition.Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition.Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.Supervised study of an appropriate area of the discipline while traveling in a foreign country or in the U.S. Special fees apply.A workshop for advanced graduate students in rhetoric and professional communication. Focus on qualitative or quantitative methods.A workshop for advanced graduate students in rhetoric and professional communication.A workshop for advanced graduate students in rhetoric and professional communication."Exploration of relationships between theory and practice in current pedagogy. Intensive examination of contemporary theories of poststructuralism, new media, feminism, postcolonialism, or cultural studies  and their impact on current pedagogical practice. Participation in pedagogical research and theory building.""Rhetorical theory, criticism, and/or practice in relation to an historical period or a particular theoretical issue.""Survey of research traditions in applied linguistics. Focus on theoretical and practical aspects of quantitative and qualitative approaches to applied linguistic study, including experimental and quasiexperimental methods, classroom observation and research, introspective methods, elicitation techniques, case studies, interactional analysis, ethnography, and program evaluation. Computational tools and resources for linguistic research will be highlighted."Principles and practice for the use and study of computers and the Internet in second language assessment."Topic changes each semester. Topics include advanced methods in natural language processing, technology and literacy in a global context, feedback in CALL programs, technology and pronunciation, and advances in language assessment.""Survey of the major components of writing instruction in academic and nonacademic settings. History, theory, organization, and evaluation of writing programs. Guided observation of writing program functions at various institutions and businesses.""Focus on integrating theoretical knowledge with practical expertise. Assess client needs; develop, integrate, and evaluate solutions.   Practical understanding of computer applications used in multimedia development. Create web-based or CD-ROM-based   multimedia materials. Work with advanced authoring applications."Research.5 weeks. Classroom section spring only. World Wide Web section of course offered summer and fall semesters. Biological and ecological aspects of insects.11 weeks. Classroom section spring only. World Wide Web section offered fall semester.  The importance of insects in human well-being. Insect-human interactions. Primarily for nonscience and nonagriculture majors."Core background and specialty topics in agricultural, and horticultural pesticide applicator certification. Students can select certification categories and have the opportunity to obtain pesticide applicator certification at the completion of the course. Commercial pesticide applicator certification is emphasized.""Structure, physiology, evolution, behavior, life histories, and recognition of insects. Collection required.""Field and laboratory study of insects, their diversity, life history; emphasis on ecology and behavior.""Classroom and off-campus videotape sections. 12 weeks. Recognition, biology, behavior, economic importance, and   management of insects and other arthropods affecting livestock and poultry production.""Identification, biology, and significance of insects and arthropods that affect the health of humans and animals, particularly those that are vectors of disease.""Laboratory and field techniques for studying medical or public health entomology, including: collection, identification and maintenance of medically significant arthropods and experimental design and execution related to the biology of arthropods or arthropod-pathogen interactions.""Overview of the biology, ecology, and classification of insect pathogens, predators, and parasitoids. Discussion of   the use of these organisms in plant protection, including an emphasis on genetic alteration of natural enemies.""Introduction to entomology and insect-pest management, including life processes, ecology, economics, tactics of population suppression, and ecological backlash.""Overview of insect-virus interactions including insect immunity to viruses, genetic enhancement of viral insecticides, transgenic mosquitoes, disruption of virus transmission, and the role of insect and virus genomics in combating viral disease of both human and agricultural importance.""Morphology, ecology, diversity, and significance of aquatic insects, with emphasis on the collection, curation and identification of taxa in local streams and lakes.""Fate and significance of pesticides in soil, water, plants, animals, and the atmosphere."Identification and biology of important diseases and insect pests of turfgrasses. Development of integrated pest management programs in various turfgrass environments."Land use and conservation techniques for improving ecosystem services including: pollination of crops, biological control of pests, prevention of erosion and water quality improvement.""The contribution of insects to ecosystem function is staggering.  This course will focus on insect population ecology, predator-prey interaction and chemical ecology.  The role of insects in nutrient cycling, pollination and pest management will be discussed with case studies used to highlight the applied nature of insect ecology and its relationship to agriculture."A maximum of 9 credits of all (university-wide) 490 credits may be applied toward graduation.A maximum of 9 of all (university-wide) 490 credits may be used toward graduation.A maximum of 9 of all (university-wide) 490 credits may be used toward graduation."Overview of insect-virus interactions including insect immunity to viruses, genetic enhancement of viral insecticides, transgenic mosquitoes, disruption of virus transmission, and the role of insect and virus genomics in combating viral disease of both human and agricultural importance.""Applications of Integrated Crop Management principles (including plant pathology, entomology, and horticulture) to tropical cropping systems. Familiarization with a variety of tropical agroecosystems and Costa Rican culture is followed by 10-day tour of Costa Rican agriculture during spring break, then writeup of individual projects.""Morphology, ecology, diversity, and significance of aquatic insects, with emphasis on the collection, curation and identification of taxa in local streams and lakes.""Durable, least-toxic strategies for managing weeds, pathogens, and insect pests, with emphasis on underlying ecological processes.""Fate and significance of pesticides in soil, water, plants, animals, and the atmosphere."Identification and biology of important diseases and insect pests of turfgrasses. Development of integrated pest management programs in various turfgrass environments."Life processes of the insects, including reviews of current problems in insect physiology.""Land use and conservation techniques for improving ecosystem services including: pollination of crops, biological control of pests, prevention of erosion and water quality improvement.""Principles and practice of systematic biology; taxonomy, nomenclature and classification of plants and animals; sources and interpretation of systematic data; speciation; fundamentals of phylogenetic systematics.""Physiological, behavioral, ecological, and evolutionary factors that govern interactions between insects and plants, applications of this knowledge to agriculture, and important results from the study of natural systems. Additional topics covered during the semester include: tritrophic interactions, biological control of plants by insects, and pollination biology. Student-led discussions and draws on both the primary and secondary literature.""The contribution of insects to ecosystem function is staggering.  This course will focus on insect population ecology, predator-prey interaction and chemical ecology.  The role of insects in nutrient cycling, pollination and pest management will be discussed with case studies used to highlight the applied nature of insect ecology and its relationship to agriculture.""Identification, biology, and significance of insects and other arthropods that attack people and animals, particularly those that are vectors of disease.""Overview of the biology, ecology, and classification of insect pathogens, predators, and parasitoids. Discussion of   the use of these organisms in plant protection, including an emphasis on genetic alteration of natural enemies.""Classification, distribution, and natural history of insects, including fundamentals of phylogenetic systematics, biogeography, taxonomic procedures, and insect collection and curation."Presentation of research results."Principles of insecticide toxicology; classification, mode of action, metabolism, and environmental effects of insecticides."Overview of Environmental Science curriculum and discussion of professional opportunities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Discussion of current and emerging environmental issues such as human population growth, energy use, loss of biodiversity, water resources, and climate change."Exploration of specific environmental and sustainability issues; designed to complement ENSCI 201.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Continued exploration of specific environmental science issues developed in ENSCI 202.  Topics may vary in different years.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."The distribution, origins and functions of the earth's physical systems and the spatial relationship between human activity and the natural world."Plant and microbial processes in environmental systems including their interactions with human activities."Effects of environmental factors on ecosystem structure and function using forest, prairie and agricultural ecosystems as models. Special emphasis is given to soil-forming factors and the role of soil in nutrient and water cycling and ecosystem dynamics.  Additional emphasis is given to human influences on natural ecosystems and the role of perennial plant communities in agricultural landscapes.""Fundamental concepts and principles of ecology dealing with organisms, populations, communities and ecosystems. Laboratory and field exercises examine ecological principles and methods as well as illustrate habitats.""An introduction to the principles of ecology at the population, community and ecosystem level. Field studies of local lakes, wetlands and prairies are used to examine factors controlling distributions, interactions, and roles of plants and animals in native ecosystems.""Renewable and non-renewable energy resources. Origin, occurrence, and extraction of fossil fuels. Nuclear, wind, geothermal, biomass, hydroelectric, and solar energy. Biofuels. Energy efficiency. Environmental effects of energy production and use, including air pollution, acid precipitation, coal ash, mountaintop removal mining, oil drilling, hydraulic fracturing, groundwater contamination, nuclear waste disposal, and global climate change. Carbon sequestration and geoengineering solutions for reducing atmospheric CO2 concentrations.""Measurement and interpretation of aerial photos in resource management. Introduction to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) using ArcGIS including digitizing, development and query of attribute tables, georeferencing, and use of multiple GIS layers in simple spatial analyses."Application of soil science to contemporary environmental problems; comparison of the impacts that different management strategies have on short- and long-term environmental quality and land development. Emphasis on participatory learning activities."Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) with emphasis on ecological and environmental applications. No prior GIS experience required. Guided, individualized study of topics based on student background and interest. For students with prior experience, topics and activities are selected to build upon any previous experience and minimize duplication to previous GIS coursework. Potential topics include: basic concepts of GIS, data structures, database management, spatial analysis, modeling and visualization of ecological and environmental data. Case studies in ecological and environmental applications using ArcGIS.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to the structure and function of natural environmental systems. Emphasis on the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems.Continuation of ENSCI 381. Systems approach to the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems.Biological and physical processes affecting material and energy flows in natural and managed ecosystems. Understanding and predicting climate and management impacts on ecosystem services and sustainability.Supervised off-campus work experience in the field of environmental science.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Practical experience in an approved setting such as a research laboratory, government office, or private office.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Examination of watersheds as systems, emphasizing the surface components of the hydrologic cycle.  Combines qualitative understanding of hydrological processes and uncertainty with quantitative representation.  Laboratory emphasizes field investigation and measurement of watershed processes.""Effects of geomorphology, soils, and land use on transport of water and materials (nutrients, contaminates) in watersheds. Fieldwork will emphasize investigations of the Iowa Great Lakes watershed.""Recent changes in global biogeochemical cycles and climate; models of future changes in the climate system; impacts of global change on agriculture, water resources and human health; ethical issues of global environmental change.  Also offered online Alt. F, even-numbered years.""A description of the physical microenvironment in which organisms live. Emphasis on the movement of energy (heat and radiation) and mass (water and carbon) among organisms, the soil, and atmosphere.  Applications to humans, other animals, plants, and plant communities.""Distribution and causes of different climates around the world. Effects of climate and climate variations on human activities including society, economy and agriculture. Current issues such as climate change and international efforts to assess and mitigate the consequences of a changing climate.  Semester project and in-class presentation required.""Managing human impacts on the hydrologic cycle. Field and watershed level best management practices for modifying the impacts on water quality, quantity and timing are discussed. Field project includes developing a management plan using landscape buffers.""Introduction to fundamental concepts and applications of GIS in natural resources management with specific focus on watersheds. Topics include: basic GIS technology, data structures, database management, spatial analysis, and modeling; visualization and display of natural resource data. Case studies in watershed and natural resource management using ArcView GIS.""Introduction to field methods used in groundwater investigations. In-field implementation of pumping tests, slug tests, monitoring well installation and drilling techniques, geochemical and water quality sampling, seepage meters, minipiezometers, stream gaging, and electronic instrumentation for data collection. Field trips to investigate water resource, water quality, and remediation projects.""Physical principles of groundwater flow, nature and origin of aquifers and confining units, well hydraulics, groundwater modeling, and contaminant transport. Lab emphasizes applied field and laboratory methods for hydrogeological investigations.""Introduction to the principles of modeling groundwater flow systems. Finite-difference and analytic-element methods, spreadsheet models, boundary conditions, calibration, sensitivity analysis, parameter estimation, particle tracking, and post-audit analysis. Application of MODFLOW to regional flow-system analysis. Computer laboratory emphasizes assigned problems that illustrate topics discussed in the course.""Introduction to mechanisms that drive climate, including the interplay between oceanic and atmospheric circulation and fluctuation in Earth's orbital parameters. Examination and analysis of past climate records ranging from historical documentation to ecological and geochemical proxies (e.g. tree ring analysis; O and C isotopes of skeletal carbonates and soils). Dating methods used to constrain and correlate climatic periods; utility of computer models to reconstruct past climates and predict future climate change. Emphasis placed on paleoclimatology and paleoecology of the late Quaternary (last ~1 million years).""Study of the basic principles of hydrologic modeling, including rainfall-runoff analysis, lumped and distributed modeling, conceptual and physical models, parameter estimation and sensitivity analysis, input and validation data, uncertainty analysis, and the use of models in surface water hydrology. A range of common models are applied to study hydrologic topics such as flood forecasting and land use change impacts. Previous experience with Matlab or other programming language is needed.""Biological, chemical, physical, and geological processes that determine the structure and function of flowing water ecosystems. Current ecological theories as well as applications to stream management for water quality and fisheries.""Geochemistry of natural waters and water-rock interactions. Acid-base equilibria, carbonate chemistry and buffer systems, mineral dissolution and precipitation, sorption, ion exchange, and redox reactions. Introduction to thermodynamics and kinetics. Laboratory emphasizes chemical analysis of waters and computer modeling.""Principles of chemical and physical phenomena applicable to the treatment of water and wastewater and natural waters; including chemical equilbria, reaction kinetics, acid-base equilibria, chemical precipitation, redox reactions, and mass transfer principles. Individual laboratory practicals and group projects required."Basic patterns and underlying physical and biotic causes of both regional and local distributions of plants and animals of North American prairies; field and laboratory analyses and projects.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E.1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E."Introduction to the theory, methods and applications of stable isotopes. Primary focus on the origin, natural abundance, and fractionation of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen isotopes. Applications of isotopic occurrence for elucidation of physical, chemical, biological, and environmental processes. Effects of plant physiology, photosynthesis, trophic structure, diffusion, evaporation, chemical precipitation, soil and atmospheric processes, and environmental factors on isotope abundance.""Hydrology and hydraulics in agricultural and urbanizing watersheds.  Design and evaluation of systems for the conservation and quality preservation of soil and water resources.   Use and analysis of hydrologic data in engineering design; relationship of topography, soils, crops, climate, and cultural practices in conservation and quality preservation of soil and water for agriculture.  Small watershed hydrology, water movement and utilization in the soil-plant-atmosphere system, agricultural water management, best management practices, and agricultural water quality."Emphasis on the use of GPS as a data collection tool for GIS. Basic theory of GPS. Use of Global Positioning System technology for spatial data collection and navigation. Post-processing and real-time correction of GPS data. GPS data transfer to GIS for mapping applications. Use of GIS to construct waypoints for use in GPS navigation."Seismic, gravity, magnetic, resistivity, electromagnetic, and ground-penetrating radar techniques for shallow subsurface investigations and imaging. Data interpretation methods. Lab emphasizes computer interpretation packages. Field work with seismic - and resistivity-imaging systems and radar."Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) with particular emphasis on geoscientific data. Uses ESRI's ArcGIS Desktop Software and extension modules. Emphasizes typical GIS operations and analyses in the geosciences to prepare students for advanced GIS courses."An introduction to the chemical properties of soils, chemical reactions and transformations in soils and surface waters, and their impact on the environment. Topics include solution chemistry in soils and surface waters, solid-phase composition of soils, reactions at the solid-solution interface, and applications to contemporary environmental issues.""Descriptive and predictive GIS modeling techniques, spatial statistics, and map algebra. Application of GIS   modeling techniques to environmental planning and resource management.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use. Two weekend field trips.   Credit for one of AGRON 463 or AGRON 463I may be applied for graduation.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use.   Credit for only Agron 563 or 563I may be applied for graduation.""Ecology, classification, creation and restoration, and management of wetlands.  Emphasis on North American temperate wetlands.""Land use and conservation techniques for improving ecosystem services including: pollination of crops, biological control of pests, prevention of erosion and water quality improvement.""The physical soil system: the soil components and their physical interactions; transport processes involving water, air, and heat.""The study of physical processes that shape Earth's surface. Topics include weathering, sediment transport, and landform genesis with emphasis on fluvial, glacial, hillslope, eolian, and coastal processes. Applications to engineering and environmental problems. Laboratory includes topographic map interpretation and local field trips."Systems-level engineering analysis of biological systems. Economic and life-cycle analysis of bioresource production and conversion systems. Global energy and resource issues and the role of biologically derived materials in addressing these issues."Introduction of the study of ecosystems and the biological and physical factors that influence their properties and dynamics. Conceptual foundations for ecosystem studies. Interactions among organisms, biological diversity, and ecosystem attributes. Quantitative analyses of accumulations, transformations, and fluxes of nutrients, water, and energy within and among ecosystems. Global change issues.""The living organisms in the soil and what they do. Emphasis on soil biota composition, the carbon cycle and bioremediation, soil-plant-microbial relationships, and environmental issues.""Structure and function of aquatic ecosystems with application to fishery and pollution problems. Emphasis on lacustrine, riverine, and wetland ecology."Field trips and laboratory exercises to accompany 486. Hands-on experience with aquatic research and monitoring techniques and concepts.Introduction to major functional groups of autotrophic and heterotrophic microorganisms and their roles in natural systems."GIS course with focus on the spatial analysis and modeling of raster data and triangulated irregular network (TIN) data. Uses ArcGIS and various extensions, such as Spatial Analyst, 3D Analyst, and ArcScene. Includes practical exercises during lectures, lab exercises, homework assignments, and (for GEOL 588) a class project."Permission of instructor and approval of Environmental Science coordinator.Current topics and case studies related to the analysis and management of environmental systems. Individual and/or group projects.Extended field trips to study environmental topics in varied locations. Location and duration of trips will vary. Trip expenses paid by students. Check with department for current offerings.  A.  International Tour  B.  Domestic Tour.Extended field trips to study environmental topics in varied locations. Location and duration of trips will vary. Trip expenses paid by students. Check with department for current offerings.Extended field trips to study environmental topics in varied locations. Location and duration of trips will vary. Trip expenses paid by students. Check with department for current offerings.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register prior to commencing each work period."Examination of watersheds as systems, emphasizing the surface components of the hydrologic cycle.  Combines qualitative understanding of hydrological processes and uncertainty with quantitative representation.  Laboratory emphasizes field investigation and measurement of watershed processes.""Recent changes in global biogeochemical cycles and climate; models of future changes in the climate system; impacts of global change on agriculture, water resources and human health; ethical issues of global environmental change.  Also offered online Alt. F, even-numbered years.""A description of the physical microenvironment in which organisms live. Emphasis on the movement of energy (heat and radiation) and mass (water and carbon) among organisms, the soil, and atmosphere.  Applications to humans, other animals, plants, and plant communities.""Managing human impacts on the hydrologic cycle. Field and watershed level best management practices for modifying the impacts on water quality, quantity and timing are discussed. Field project includes developing a management plan using landscape buffers.""Introduction to fundamental concepts and applications of GIS in natural resources management with specific focus on watersheds. Topics include: basic GIS technology, data structures, database management, spatial analysis, and modeling; visualization and display of natural resource data. Case studies in watershed and natural resource management using ArcView GIS."Analysis of aquatic ecosystems; emphasis on basic ecological principles; ecological theories tested in the field; identification of common plants and animals."Introduction to field methods used in groundwater investigations. In-field implementation of pumping tests, slug tests, monitoring well installation and drilling techniques, geochemical and water quality sampling, seepage meters, minipiezometers, stream gaging, and electronic instrumentation for data collection. Field trips to investigate water resource, water quality, and remediation projects.""Physical principles of groundwater flow, nature and origin of aquifers and confining units, well hydraulics, groundwater modeling, and contaminant transport. Lab emphasizes applied field and laboratory methods for hydrogeological investigations.""Introduction to the principles of modeling groundwater flow systems. Finite-difference and analytic-element methods, spreadsheet models, boundary conditions, calibration, sensitivity analysis, parameter estimation, particle tracking, and post-audit analysis. Application of MODFLOW to regional flow-system analysis. Computer laboratory emphasizes assigned problems that illustrate topics discussed in the course.""Introduction to mechanisms that drive climate, including the interplay between oceanic and atmospheric circulation and fluctuation in Earth's orbital parameters. Examination and analysis of past climate records ranging from historical documentation to ecological and geochemical proxies (e.g. tree ring analysis; O and C isotopes of skeletal carbonates and soils). Dating methods used to constrain and correlate climatic periods; utility of computer models to reconstruct past climates and predict future climate change. Emphasis placed on paleoclimatology and paleoecology of the late Quaternary (last ~ 1 million years).""Study of the basic principles of hydrologic modeling, including rainfall-runoff analysis, lumped and distributed modeling, conceptual and physical models, parameter estimation and sensitivity analysis, input and validation data, uncertainty analysis, and the use of models in surface water hydrology. A range of common models are applied to study hydrologic topics such as flood forecasting and land use change impacts. Previous experience with Matlab or other programming language is needed.""Biological, chemical, physical, and geological processes that determine the structure and function of flowing water ecosystems. Current ecological theories as well as applications to stream management for water quality and fisheries.""Geochemistry of natural waters and water-rock interactions. Acid-base equilibria, carbonate chemistry and buffer systems, mineral dissolution and precipitation, sorption, ion exchange, and redox reactions. Introduction to thermodynamics and kinetics. Laboratory emphasizes chemical analysis of waters and computer modeling.""Principles of chemical and physical phenomena applicable to the treatment of water and wastewater and natural waters; including chemical equilbria, reaction kinetics, acid-base equilibria, chemical precipitation, redox reactions, and mass transfer principles. Individual laboratory practicals and group projects required.""Fundamentals of biochemical and microbial processes applied to environmental engineering processes, role of microorganisms in wastewater treatment and bioremediation, bioenergetics and kinetics, metabolism of xenobiotic compounds, waterborne pathogens and parasites, and disinfection. Term paper and oral presentation.""Fundamentals of biochemical processes, aerobic growth in a single CSTR, multiple events in complex systems, and techniques for evaluating kinetic parameters; unit processes of activated sludge system, attached growth systems, stabilization and aerated lagoon systems, biosolids digestion and disposal, nutrient removal, and anaerobic treatment systems.""Material and energy balances. Principles and design of physical-chemical unit processes; including screening, coagulation, flocculation, chemical precipitation, sedimentation, filtration, lime softening and stabilization, oxidation, adsorption, membrane processes, ion exchange and disinfection; recovery of resources from residuals and sludges; laboratory exercises and demonstrations; case studies in mineral processing and secondary industries."1 cr. per module. Module A prereq for all modules; module B prereq for D and E."Introduction to the theory, methods and applications of stable isotopes. Primary focus on the origin, natural abundance, and fractionation of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen isotopes. Applications of isotopic occurrence for elucidation of physical, chemical, biological, and environmental processes. Effects of plant physiology, photosynthesis, trophic structure, diffusion, evaporation, chemical precipitation, soil and atmospheric processes, and environmental factors on isotope abundance.""Evaluation, characterization, assessment, planning and design of solid and hazardous waste management systems, regulatory requirements, material characterization and collection, minimization and recycling, energy and materials recovery, composting, off-gas treatment, incineration, stabilization, and landfill design. Design of treatment and disposal systems, including physical, chemical, and biological treatment, solidification, incineration, secure landfill design, and final disposal site closure plus restoration.""Hydrology and hydraulics in agricultural and urbanizing watersheds.  Design and evaluation of systems for the conservation and quality preservation of soil and water resources.   Use and analysis of hydrologic data in engineering design; relationship of topography, soils, crops, climate, and cultural practices in conservation and quality preservation of soil and water for agriculture.  Small watershed hydrology, water movement and utilization in the soil-plant-atmosphere system, agricultural water management, best management practices, and agricultural water quality.""Characteristics and courses of non-point source (NPS) pollution in agricultural and urban watersheds, computer modeling and NPS pollution for terrestrial and aquatic systems, strategies to control and manage NPS pollution of water bodies, total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) and integrated watershed management. Graduate students are required to review research papers and develop/deliver lecture models on assigned topics.""Soil erosion processes, soil loss equations and their application to conservation planning, sediment properties, initiation of sediment motion and over land flow, flow in alluvial channels and theory of sediment transport, channel stability, reservoir sedimentation, wind erosion, BMPs for controlling erosion.""Theory and practice of restoring animal and plant diversity, structure and function of disturbed ecosystems. Restored freshwater wetlands, forests, prairies and reintroduced species populations will be used as case studies.""Ecological principles for the restoration of native ecosystems; establishment (site preparation, selection of seed   mixes, planting techniques) and management (fire, mowing, weed control) of native vegetation; evaluation of restorations. Emphasis on the restoration of prairie and wetland vegetation.""Development of monitoring systems that support effective planning, performance evaluation, modeling, or environmental impact assessment of soil-, water-, and waste-management systems.  Typical soil and water pollutants and physical, chemical, and biological characteristics that affect sample location and timing. Sample collection, documentation, chain-of-custody, and quality assurance procedures.  In addition to other assignments, graduate students will prepare several research literature reviews on topics covered in the class and develop monitoring plans.""A project-based course to develop a water quality improvement plan. The legislative and judicial basis of the Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) program, different approaches for TMDL development, data needs and sources, SWAT modeling, and principles and techniques for implementation of water quality improvement plans."Emphasis on the use of GPS as a data collection tool for GIS. Basic theory of GPS. Use of Global Positioning System technology for spatial data collection and navigation. Post-processing and real-time correction of GPS data. GPS data transfer to GIS for mapping applications. Use of GIS to construct waypoints for use in GPS navigation."Seismic, gravity, magnetic, resistivity, electromagnetic, and ground-penetrating radar techniques for shallow subsurface investigations and imaging. Data interpretation methods. Lab emphasizes computer interpretation packages. Field work with seismic - and resistivity-imaging systems and radar."Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) with particular emphasis on geoscientific data. Uses ESRI's ArcGIS Desktop Software and extension modules. Emphasizes typical GIS operations and analyses in the geosciences to prepare students for advanced GIS courses.Composition and properties of soils in relation to the nutrition and growth of plants."Experimental and descriptive inorganic and organic analyses. Operational theory and principles of applicable instruments, including spectrophotometry, atomic and molecular absorption and emission spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, X-ray diffraction and fluorescence, gas and ion chromatography, and ion-selective electrodes.""An introduction to the chemical properties of soils, chemical reactions and transformations in soils and surface waters, and their impact on the environment. Topics include solution chemistry in soils and surface waters, solid-phase composition of soils, reactions at the solid-solution interface, and applications to contemporary environmental issues.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use. Two weekend field trips.   Credit for one of AGRON 463 or AGRON 463I may be applied for graduation.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use.   Credit for only Agron 563 or 563I may be applied for graduation.""Ecology, classification, creation and restoration, and management of wetlands. Emphasis on North American temperate wetlands.""Ecology, classification, creation, restoration, and management of wetlands. Field studies will examine the composition, structure and functions of local natural wetlands and restored prairie pothole wetlands. Individual or group projects.""Land use and conservation techniques for improving ecosystem services including: pollination of crops, biological control of pests, prevention of erosion and water quality improvement.""Analysis of hydrologic data including precipitation, infiltration, evapotranspiration, direct runoff and streamflow; theory and use of frequency analysis; theory of streamflow and reservoir routing; use of deterministic and statistical hydrologic models. Fundamentals of surface water quality modeling, point and non-point sources of contamination. Design project.""Principles of surface water flows and mixing. Introduction to hydrologic transport and water   quality simulation in natural water systems. Advection, diffusion and dispersion, chemical and   biologic kinetics, and water quality dynamics. Applications to temperature, dissolved oxygen,   primary productivity, and other water quality problems in rivers, lakes and reservoirs.   Deterministic vs. stochastic models.""Principles of groundwater flow, hydraulics of wells, superposition, slug and pumping tests, streamlines and flownets, and regional groundwater flow. Contaminant transport. Computer modeling. Design project. Extra assignments required for graduate students.""Advanced study of soil formation, emphasizing relationships among soils, landscapes, environment, humans, and land use.""The physical soil system: the soil components and their physical interactions; transport processes involving water, air, and heat.""Methods of measuring soil physical properties such as texture, density, and water content, and transport of heat, water, and gases.""The study of physical processes that shape Earth's surface. Topics include weathering, sediment transport, and landform genesis with emphasis on fluvial, glacial, hillslope, eolian, and coastal processes. Applications to engineering and environmental problems. Laboratory includes topographic map interpretation and local field trips."Introduction to the structure and function of natural environmental systems. Emphasis on the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems.Continuation of ENSCI 381. Systems approach to the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems."Advanced studies of ecosystems and the biological and physical factors that influence their properties and dynamics. Conceptual foundations and modern approaches to  ecosystem studies. Interactions among organisms, biological diversity, and ecosystem attributes. Quantitative analyses of accumulations, transformations, and fluxes of nutrients, water, and energy within and among ecosystems.  Global change issues.""The living organisms in the soil and what they do. Emphasis on soil biota composition, the carbon cycle and bioremediation, soil-plant-microbial relationships, and environmental issues.""(Dual-listed with BIOL 486.) Structure and function of aquatic ecosystems with application to fishery and pollution problems. Emphasis on lacustrine, riverine and wetland ecology."(Dual-listed with BIOL 486L.) Field trips and laboratory exercises to accompany 586. Hands-on experience with aquatic research and monitoring techniques and concepts.Introduction to major functional groups of autotrophic and heterotrophic microorganisms and their roles in natural systems."GIS course with focus on the spatial analysis and modeling of raster data and triangulated irregular network (TIN) data. Uses ArcGIS and various extensions, such as Spatial Analyst, 3D Analyst, and ArcScene. Includes practical exercises during lectures, lab exercises, homework assignments, and (for GEOL 588) a class project."Literature reviews and conference in accordance with needs and interest of the student.Creative component for nonthesis master of science degree.Chemistry of soil organic matter and biochemical transformations brought about by microorganisms and enzymes in soils.Reports and discussion of recent research and literature."An introduction to geologic processes and the consequences of human activity from local to global scales. Discussion of human population growth, resource depletion, pollution and waste disposal, global warming and ozone depletion, desertification, and geologic hazards such as earthquakes, landslides, flooding, and volcanism.""Introduction to study of the oceans. Ocean exploration. Waves and currents. Shape, structure, and origin of the ocean basins. Sedimentary record of oceanic life. Composition of seawater and its significance for life. Ocean circulation and its influence on climate. Life of the oceans, including coral reefs. Use and misuse of ocean resources. Anthropogenic impacts on the oceanic environment.""Introduction to the catastrophic geologic processes that disrupt ecosystems and human activity. Includes a discussion on the role of plate tectonics, the hydrologic cycle, and humans as the driving forces behind selected case studies on volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, tsunamis, landslides, and floods. Summer - online only.""Overview of soil, water, plants, and animals as renewable natural resources in an ecosystem context. History and organization of resource management. Concepts of integrated resource management.""Survey of the ecology and management of fish, forest, and wildlife resources in areas of intensive agriculture, with emphasis on Iowa. Conservation and management practices for private agricultural lands. Designed for nonmajors.""Study of the occurrence, history, development, and management of world water resources.  Basic hydrologic principles including climate, surface water, groundwater, and water quality.  Historical and current perspectives on water policy, use, and the role of water in society and the environment.""An introduction to the structure and function of natural systems at scales from the individual to the biosphere and the complex interactions between humans and their environment. Discussions of human population growth, biodiversity, sustainability, resource use, and pollution. Does not satisfy biology major requirements.""Discussion of current and emerging environmental issues such as human population growth, energy use, loss of biodiversity, water resources, and climate change.""Survey of the major groups of organisms and biological systems. Definition, measurements, and patterns of distribution of organisms. Sources of information about biodiversity. Does not satisfy biology major requirements.  Half semester course.""An introduction to the key global issues in sustainability. Focuses on interconnected roles of energy, materials, human resources, economics, and technology in building and maintaining sustainable systems. Applications discussed will include challenges in both the developed and developing world and will examine the role of technology in a resource-constrained world.   Cannot be used for technical elective credit in any engineering department.""The distribution, origins and functions of the earth's physical systems and the spatial relationship between human activity and the natural world.""Role of soils in environmental quality and natural resources management. Emphasis on soil erosion and conservation, water quality, and environmental planning. Saturday field trip.""The development of natural resource conservation philosophy and policy from the Colonial Era to the present. North American wildlife, forestry, and environmental policy; national parks and other protected lands; federal and state agencies.  Relationship to cultural contexts, including urban reform and American planning movement. Discussion of common pool resources, public and private lands.""Comprehensive overview of the field of environmental relationships and the efforts being made to organize, control, and coordinate environmental, aesthetic, and cultural characteristics of land, air, and water.""Women's relationships with the earth, non-human nature, and other humans. The course explores the connections between societyÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s treatment of women and nature; origins of ecofeminism and how it relates to the science of ecology, conventional and sustainable agriculture as well as how ecofeminism relates to other branches of feminist philosophy. Evaluation and critique of modern science, technology, political systems and SOLUTIONS will be included.""Renewable and non-renewable energy resources. Origin, occurrence, and extraction of fossil fuels. Nuclear, wind, geothermal, biomass, hydroelectric, and solar energy. Biofuels. Energy efficiency. Environmental effects of energy production and use, including air pollution, acid precipitation, coal ash, mountaintop removal mining, oil drilling, hydraulic fracturing, groundwater contamination, nuclear waste disposal, and global climate change. Carbon sequestration and geoengineering solutions for reducing atmospheric CO2 concentrations.""Thorough study of some of the central moral issues arising in connection with human impact on the environment, e.g., human overpopulation, species extinction, forest and wilderness management, pollution. Several world views of the proper relationship between human beings and nature will be explored.""Issues in the agricultural and food systems of the developed and developing world. Emphasis on economic, social, historical, ethical and environmental contexts. Causes and consequences of overnutrition/undernutrition, poverty, hunger and access/distribution. Explorations of current issues and ideas for the future. Team projects.""Issues in the agricultural and food systems of the developed and developing world. Emphasis on economic, social, historical, ethical and environmental contexts. Causes and consequences of overnutrition/undernutrition, poverty, hunger and access/distribution. Explorations of current issues and ideas for the future. Team projects.""Human population growth and structure; impact on food, environment, and resources; gender issues; trends of births, deaths, and migration; projecting future population; population policies and laws; comparison of the United States with other societies throughout the world.""Study of literary texts that address the following topics, among others: the relationship between people and natural/urban environments, ecocriticism, and the importance of place in the literary imagination.""Natural resource availability, use, conservation, and government policy, including energy issues. Environmental quality and pollution control policies."Introduction to the structure and function of natural environmental systems. Emphasis on the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems."Environment-society relations; social construction of nature and the environment; social and environmental impacts of resource extraction, production, and consumption; environmental inequality; environmental mobilization and movements; U.S. and international examples.""Major ideologies relation to conservation and ecology. Processes, participants, and institutions involved in state, national, and global environmental policymaking. Case studies of environmental controversies and proposals for policy reform.""Introduction to concepts of religion and ecology as they appear in different religious traditions, from both a historical and contemporary perspective. Special attention to religious response to contemporary environmental issues.""Practical experience with nature centers, government agencies, schools, private conservation groups, and other organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Recent changes in global biogeochemical cycles and climate; models of future changes in the climate system; impacts of global change on agriculture, water resources and human health; ethical issues of global environmental change.  Also offered online Alt. F, even-numbered years.""Managing human impacts on the hydrologic cycle. Field and watershed level best management practices for modifying the impacts on water quality, quantity and timing are discussed. Field project includes developing a management plan using landscape buffers.""Assessment and reduction of impacts in urban and peri-urban watershed areas. Course prepares students to work with various analysis methods for vegetation, topography, stormwater and stream condition as well as work with data from other disciplines. Emphasis on communicating with the public. Introductory GIS and GPS technologies are utilized. Learning is largely field-based.""Inquiry into ethical issues and environmental consequences of horticultural cropping systems, production practices and managed landscapes. Emphasis on systems that are resource efficient, environmentally sound, socially acceptable, and profitable.""Exploration of political implications of coastal policy. Issues include: ""Carrying capacity,"" zoning, regulation of human development activities, trade-offs between conservation and jobs, the quality of coastal lifestyle, ways in which citizens participate in policy for coastal areas."Agricultural science as a human activity; contemporary agricultural issues from agroecological perspective. Comparative analysis of intended and actual consequences of development of industrial agricultural practices."Analysis of controversial natural resource issues using a case approach that considers uncertainty and adequacy of information and scientific understanding. Ecological, social, political, economic, and ethical implications of issues will be analyzed.""Descriptive and predictive GIS modeling techniques, spatial statistics, and map algebra. Application of GIS   modeling techniques to environmental planning and resource management.""Survey of the interactions of human communities with the North American environment. Focus on the period from presettlement to the present, with a particular concentration on natural resources, disease, settlement patterns, land use, and conservation policies."The history and theory of sustainable community planning.  Procedural and substantive dimensions.  Case studies of communities engaged in sustainability planning.  Use and development of indicators."Environmental law and policy as applied in planning at the local and state levels. Brownfields, environmental justice, water quality, air quality, wetland and floodplain management, and local government involvement in ecological protection through land use planning and other programs."Extended field trips to study environmental topics in varied locations. Location and duration of   trips will vary. Trip expenses paid by students. Check with department for current offerings.Extended field trips to study environmental topics in varied locations. Location and duration of   trips will vary. Trip expenses paid by students. Check with department for current offerings.Extended field trips to study environmental topics in varied locations. Location and duration of   trips will vary. Trip expenses paid by students. Check with department for current offerings.Overview of the event management industries. Techniques and procedures required for producing successful and sustainable events."Organization and management of private clubs including city, country, and other recreational and social clubs. Field trip may be required."Examination of current issues in the attractions and amusement park industry.  Emphasis will be placed on development and design along with the functional departments of modern amusement parks and themed attractions."Organization and management of various types of entertainment venues including clubs, theaters, auditoriums, and arenas.""Application of event management principles to conference and meeting planning, trade shows, and conventions focusing on budget development, resource allocation, promotion, hospitality, and professional development.""Overview of wedding event industry.  Focus on wedding planning processes and implementation, design, and business planning and development.""Advanced application event management. Provide leadership and communicate direction for production of an event including developing budgets, publicity, advertising, fund raising, choreography, staging, lighting, and food."Independent study.Independent study.Independent study.Independent study."Influencing factors that have contributed to the development and mission of Family and Consumer Sciences. Program goals, objectives and professional ethics. Introduction to various roles in professional settings, e.g., community agencies, secondary schools, business and industry, and Cooperative Extension. Includes 12 hours of a practicum experience outside of the regular class schedule.""Principles of teaching and learning applied to family and consumer sciences content, including incorporating reading and STEM strategies. Instructional methods appropriate for formal and non-formal educational settings. Specific strategies for diverse audiences. Includes 12 hour arranged practicum. May be used for family life certification."Development of curriculum and assessment tools for family and consumer sciences programs for school settings. Accommodating exceptional learners. Includes 12 hours of Career and Technical Student Organization Competitive Event Assessment. May be used for family life certification.Supervised teaching experience in secondary schools. Examination of ways to implement actions that reflect a professional philosophy of family and consumer sciences for teaching middle and high school level students. Reservation required.Supervised teaching experience in secondary schools. Examination of ways to implement actions that reflect a professional philosophy of family and consumer sciences for teaching middle and high school level students. Reservation required.Supervised teaching experience in secondary schools. Examination of ways to implement actions that reflect a professional philosophy of family and consumer sciences for teaching middle and high school level students. Reservation required."Philosophy of career and technical education. Historical development of family and consumer sciences. Planning and implementing programs in  family and consumer sciences including FCCLA. Impact of selected legislation on family and consumer sciences programs. Techniques for cooperative education, school-to-work, and work-based education programs. May be used toward Multioccupations Endorsement.""Laboratory experience in foods, textiles and human development in family and consumer sciences secondary programs. At least 2 hour blocks of time needed for field experience. Observation of family and consumer sciences laboratories in diverse classrooms. Planning, implementing, managing and assessing laboratory lessons in family and consumer sciences.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Laboratory experience in foods, textiles and human development in family and consumer sciences secondary programs. At least 2 hour blocks of time needed for field experience. Observation of family and consumer sciences laboratories in diverse classrooms. Planning, implementing, managing and assessing laboratory lessons in family and consumer sciences.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Laboratory experience in foods, textiles and human development in family and consumer sciences secondary programs. At least 2 hour blocks of time needed for field experience. Observation of family and consumer sciences laboratories in diverse classrooms. Planning, implementing, managing and assessing laboratory lessons in family and consumer sciences.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Supervised professional experience in an approved setting such as Cooperative Extension, business, community, human service, or government agency.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Supervised professional experience in an approved setting such as Cooperative Extension, business, community, human service, or government agency.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Supervised professional experience in an approved setting such as Cooperative Extension, business, community, human service, or government agency.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Application of principles of program development and assessment to formal and non-formal educational settings, e.g., secondary school family and consumer sciences programs, training positions in business, Cooperative Extension, human services agencies. Planning and constructing test items and other assessments of school and non-school learning."Selecting and applying teaching strategies and instructional materials based on theories of learning and human development that reflect a professional philosophy of family and consumer sciences. Application to formal and non-formal educational settings with diverse audiences.Role of assessment in family and consumer sciences education programs. Planning and constructing test items and other assessments of school and nonschool learning."Philosophy of career and technical education. Historical development of family and consumer sciences. Planning and implementing programs in  family and consumer sciences including FCCLA. Impact of selected legislation on family and consumer sciences programs. Techniques for cooperative education, school-to-work, and work-based education programs. May be used toward Multioccupations Endorsement.""Theories of family functioning, macroeconomic theory related to family resource allocation decisions, the family as an economic unit, and the interaction of the economy and families.  (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Microeconomic theory as it relates to family resource allocation decisions, theories of household behavior, the lifecycle hypothesis, behavioral economics, behavioral finance, theories of behavioral change, and psychological theories of family well-being. Focus on empirical research investigating household financial decision-making. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""The nature and functioning of financial systems, including currencies, markets, monetary and fiscal policy, and supply/demand for land, labor, and capital. Focus is on the impact of global financial interdependence on individuals and families in the U.S. Current and emerging issues, as well as current research and theory relative to financial systems. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Theory and research regarding the interactive process between the client and the practitioner, including communication techniques, motivation and esteem building, the counseling environment, ethics, and methods of data intake, verification, and analysis. Other topics include legal issues, compensation, uses of technology to identify resources, information management, and current or emerging issues. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Fundamentals of the estate planning process, including estate settlement, estate and gift taxes, property ownership and transfer, and powers of appointment. Tools and techniques used in implementing an effective estate plan, ethical considerations used in providing estate planning services, and new and emerging issues in the field. Case studies provide experience in developing estate plans suitable for varied family forms. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""The role of housing and real estate in the family financial planning process, including taxation, mortgages, financial calculations, legal concerns, and ethical issues related to home ownership and real estate investments. Emphasis on emerging issues in the context of housing and real estate. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Study of micro and macro considerations for retirement planning. Survey of various types of retirement plans, ethical considerations in providing retirement planning services, assessing and forecasting financial needs in retirement, and integration of retirement plans with government benefits.(on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Overview of the topics relevant to the financial planning process that address the unique needs of military service members and their families. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."In-depth study of risk management concepts, tools, and strategies for individuals and families, including life insurance; property and casualty insurance; liability insurance; accident, disability, health, and long-term care insurance; and government-subsidized programs. Current and emerging issues and ethical considerations relative to risk management. Case studies provide experience in selecting insurance products suitable for individuals and family, study of investment options for clients including common stocks, fixed income securities, convertible securities, and related choices. Relationships between investment options and employee/employer benefit plan choices. Current and emerging issues and ethics are included. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""In-depth information on income tax practices and procedures including tax regulations, tax return preparation, the tax audit processes, the appeals process, preparation for an administrative or judicial forum, and ethical considerations of taxation. New and emerging issues related to taxation. Family/individual case studies provide practice in applying and analyzing tax information and recommending appropriate tax strategies. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Challenges of managing financial planning practices including, but not limited to: business valuation, personnel, marketing, client services, ethics and technological applications. Relying both on a theoretical as well as an applied approach, students analyze case studies that provide relevant, practical exposure to practice management issues, with a strong emphasis on current research findings. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Evaluation of investment markets for the household. Analysis of how families choose where to put their savings. Emphasis is on using the family's overall financial and economic goals to help inform investment choices. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).Supervised experience in family financial planning."Professional issues in financial planning, including ethical considerations, regulation and certification requirements, communication skills, and professional responsibility. Students are expected to utilize skills obtained in other courses and work experiences in the completion of personal finance case studies, the development of a targeted investment policy, and other related financial planning assignments. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Introduction to financial management with emphasis on corporate financing and investment decision making, time value of money, asset valuation, capital budgeting decision methods, cash budgeting, and financial markets."Theory used in a firm's investment and financing decisions. Analysis of environment in which financial decisions are made; applications of analytical techniques to financial management problems."Introduction to securities and markets from the viewpoint of the individual investor. Emphasis on mechanics of trading, measurement of return and risk, behavior of security prices, valuation of stocks and bonds, mutual funds, portfolio selection techniques, and performance evaluation.""Valuation of fixed income securities, including pricing conventions, term structure of interest rates, default, duration, and hedging of interest rate risk with derivatives. Analysis of bond market sectors, including treasury, agency, corporate, sovereign, municipal, and residential mortgage bonds."Introduction to the structure and operations of the United States financial system and its markets and institutions. Emphasis on developing an integrated understanding of markets and financial service providers including global linkages."Risk concepts and the use of insurance by individuals and families. Emphasis on the insurance mechanism and methods of dealing with income, property, and liability risks.""Legal, economic, social and financial aspects of real estate, including property rights, contracts, mortgage instruments, tax factors, brokerage, valuation, risk and return analysis, financing techniques, and investments.""In depth study of the firm's external financing decision. Emphasis on the development of cash flow statements, projected financing needs and the selection of the appropriate financing instrument. Focus on case studies and application of developed techniques on actual field project.""Advanced study of pricing and using derivatives - instruments deriving value from fundamental items such as commodities, currency exchange rates, market indices, equities and bonds. Addresses basic building blocks of derivatives (i.e., forwards, futures, options and swaps) and relevant current topics and issues.""Advanced study of security analysis, security selection techniques and portfolio management. Emphasis on the applications of methods learned via the selection and evaluation of a portfolio of actual securities purchased in securities markets in the U.S. or abroad. Tracking and periodic reporting of the portfolio's performance relative to standard benchmarks is also required.""Advanced analysis of fixed income markets and securities, including valuation and trading of treasury securities, corporate bonds, mortgage backed securities. Analysis of structured financial securities, including CDO, CMBS, and ABS. Analysis of active and passive investment strategies for managing fixed income portfolios. Students are required to manage a fixed income portfolio for an institutional investor. A top-down approach to portfolio management is assumed, with active bets taken on market direction, duration, yield curve, and credit spreads.""An advanced investments class that focuses on alternative investments. Topics include techniques for valuing public and private firms, venture capital finance, investment banking, private equity finance, leveraged buyouts, hedge funds, the structure and financing of mergers and acquisitions, and divestitures.""Analysis of operations of depository financial institutions from management viewpoint. Emphasis on evaluating performance, policy formation, asset and liability management, the role of capital, and the operating environment.""Analysis of an organization's approaches to the management of price, credit, and pure risk. Emphasis on the consideration and selection of risk control and financing treatments and the decision making framework underlying the alternatives selected. Covers commercial insurance, self-insurance, and alternative financing arrangements."Introduction to the techniques of assessing the value of real estate and real estate financing instruments."Advanced study of currency market equilibrium, use and analysis of currency derivatives, hedging currency risk, and additional topics, which could include multinational capital budgeting, taxation, raising capital internationally, international portfolio diversification, international capital market equilibrium, political and country risk, financing international trade, multinational corporate treasury management, and current issues.""Supervised experience in a private sector banking, insurance, real estate, investments or corporate organization or in a governmental agency that regulates such organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Supervised experience in a private sector banking, insurance, real estate, investments or corporate organization or in a governmental agency that regulates such organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Supervised experience in a private sector insurance organization or in a governmental agency that regulates such organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised experience in a private sector real estate organization or in a governmental agency that regulates such organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised experience in a private sector investment organization or in a governmental agency that regulates such organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised experience in a private sector corporate organization or in a governmental agency that regulates such organizations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Shareholder wealth maximization as the goal of the firm within a social responsibility context, financial Math, valuation of securities, the global financial market place as the test of value, estimation of cost of capital, global capital investment decisions, capital structure policy, working capital management.""Examines corporate financial decisions, including theory and associated empirical evidence. Topics include agency conflicts, corporate governance, executive compensation, becoming publicly traded, raising capital through public and private offerings, capital structure, financial distress and bankruptcy, leasing, dividend policy, corporate control, restructuring, and risk management.""This course focuses on case studies to develop an integrated set of financial decisions. Topic areas include fixed asset, working capital, capital structure, dividend and merger/acquisition decisions. The objective of the course is to examine different firm settings and establish a framework within which to apply financial tools.""Analysis of risk and return for individual securities and portfolios of securities. Topics include the market environment, mechanics of trading, measurement of return and risk, valuation of stocks and bonds, mutual funds, optimal asset allocation, market efficiency, portfolio performance evaluation, and risk management.""Advanced analysis of fixed income markets and securities, including valuation and trading of treasury securities, corporate bonds, mortgage backed securities. Analysis of structured financial securities, including CDO, CMBS, and ABS. Analysis of active and passive investment strategies for managing fixed income portfolios. Students are required to manage a fixed income portfolio for an institutional investor. A top-down approach to portfolio management is assumed, with active bets taken on market direction, duration, yield curve, and credit spreads.""Valuation of public and private firms through analysis of financial statements and other information. Study of drivers of value creation, industry analysis, patterns of growth, models for forecasting and analyzing firm cash flows, estimating and adjusting cost of capital, alternative methods of cash flow valuation, the calculation and use of valuation multiples, and valuing mergers and acquisitions.""An applied course in derivative markets. Topics covered include futures and options markets, option pricing, swaps, use and rating of insurance products, and alternative forms of reinsurance. Emphasis will be placed on agricultural commodity markets, but energy, interest, currency and stock index contracts will also be covered.""Advanced investments class focusing on alternative investments. Topics include the nature and scope of investment banking, techniques for valuing public and private firms, venture capital finance, private equity finance, leveraged buyouts, hedge funds, the structure and financing of mergers and acquisitions, and divestitures.""Analysis, modeling, and forecasting of time series data, volatility modeling and forecasting, maximum likelihood estimation, robust standard error computation, specification testing, estimation under alternative distributional assumptions, and Monte Carlo simulation. Applications include tests of asset pricing models, analysis of asset volatility, corporate event studies, and value at risk analysis.""Risk management tools and how they are applied within financial institutions and the corporate enterprise. Focus on measuring exposure to stock market risk, interest rate risk, currency risk, and credit risk and how these exposures may be managed. Topics include bank risk management regulations, volatility modeling, value at risk analysis, extreme value theory, credit default swaps, and portfolio simulation.""Survey of techniques for assessing the value of real estate assets.  Introduction to real estate financing instruments, their use and appropriateness."For students wishing to do individual research in a particular area of finance."The food system from point of harvest to the consumption of the food by the consumer. Properties of food constituents. Protection of food against deterioration and microbial contamination. Introduction of foods into the marketplace. Processes for making various foods. Government regulations. Use of food additives. Current and controversial topics. Electronic communication from web emphasized for class reports, notes and assignments."Analysis of how the body uses nutrients for energy and how to select a balanced diet to meet specific athletic performance needs. Lecture and activities specific to students' interest.Introduction to culinary science. Students will develop fundamental culinary skills by arranged on-campus work experience (100 hours).  Sessions with instructor arranged.Introduction to professional and educational development within the food science and human nutrition disciplines.  Focus is on university and career acclimation as well as enhancement of communication skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Principles involved in preparation of food products of standard quality. Influence of composition and techniques on properties of food products."Introduction to developing intentional learners and worthy team members. Learning as the foundation of human enterprise; intellectual curiosity; ethics as a personal responsibility; everyday leadership; effective team and community interactions including team learning and the effects on individuals; and growth through understanding self, demonstrating ownership of own learning, and internalizing commitment to helping others. Intentional mental processing as a means of enhancing learning. Interconnectedness of the individual, the community, and the world."Focus on team and community. Application of fundamentals of human learning; evidence of development as a responsible learner; intentional mental processing as a habit of mind; planning and facilitating learning opportunities for others; responsibility of the individual to the community and the world; leading from within; holding self and others accountable for growth and development as learners and leaders."Practice standard methods of food preparation with emphasis on quality, nutrient retention, and safety."Understanding and implementing present day knowledge of nutrition. The role of nutrition in the health and well being of the individual and family."Introduction to published research and discussion of current issues in food science and human nutrition.  Emphasis on sources of credible information, ethics, and communication."Composition and structure of foods. Principles of preparation of standard quality food products. Behavior and interactions of food constituents."Practice standard methods of food preparation with emphasis on quality, nutrient retention, and safety.  Development of culinary skills and advanced food preparation.""Description of food systems from farming practices to global marketing.  Exploration of the impacts of food system choices on personal health, the environment and global society.""Careers and controversies in nutritional science.  Discussion of current topics in health professions involving nutrition, such as ""low-carb"" diets, supplements for athletic performance, ""food and mood,"" interviews with health professionals on how they use nutrition concepts in practice.""Digestion, absorption, metabolism, and biochemical functions of nutrients.  Biochemical aspects of nutrient deficiencies."Fundamentals of nutrient metabolism and nutrient requirements. Role of macronutrient metabolism in physical performance and disease prevention. Effect of manipulation of macronutrient metabolism on physical performance and disease prevention. Applications of nutrient metabolism principles to dietary recommendations and planning."Course will address milk chemistry, microbiology, handling, processing, regulations, organic production, and nutrition; dispel myths about dairy foods; improve critical thinking and communication skills.  Students will participate in structured controversies and debate.""The structure, properties, and chemistry of food constituents and animal and plant commodities.""The laboratory practices of structure, properties, and chemistry of food constituents.""Introduction to the roles culinary scientists hold within industry including product development, research, and quality assurance.  Discussions focused on professional and educational development, enhancement of communication skills, ethics and emerging issues and trends in culinary science.""Introduction to the profession of dietetics and responsibilities associated with dietetic professional practice. Emphasis on exploring career options in dietetics and preparation for a dietetic internship. Leadership and professional career development for the dietitian is addressed through self reflection, creation of materials for post-baccalaureate programs and job shadowing experience. Professional issues related to dietetic practice include Code of Ethics, legal credentialing and standards of professional practice, leadership and future trends in the profession.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Issues in the agricultural and food systems of the developed and developing world. Emphasis on economic, social, historical, ethical and environmental contexts. Causes and consequences of overnutrition/undernutrition, poverty, hunger and access/distribution. Explorations of current issues and ideas for the future. Team projects.""Issues in the agricultural and food systems of the developed and developing world. Emphasis on economic, social, historical, ethical and environmental contexts. Causes and consequences of overnutrition/undernutrition, poverty, hunger and access/distribution. Explorations of current issues and ideas for the future. Team projects.""Methodology for solving problems in food processing and introduction to food engineering concepts including food properties, material and energy balances, sources of energy, thermodynamics, fluid flow, heat transfer, and mass transfer. Field trip."Physiological and biochemical basis for nutrient needs; assessment of nutrient deficiency and toxicity; examination of nutrient functions and regulation of metabolism; nutrient-gene interactions."The assessment of nutritional status in healthy individuals. Laboratory experiences in food composition and assessment of dietary intake, body composition, and biochemical indices of nutritional status.""Nutrient needs throughout the life cycle. Interrelationships of  genes, gene expression and nutrients with physiological outcomes during human development and aging.""Overview of nutrients, their functions, metabolism, food sources and optimal choices for the promotion of health and wellness. Nutrition strategies for the prevention of chronic disease, including cancer, diabetes and obesity, as they apply to individuals or the wider population will be discussed.""Multifactorial aspects of obesity, maintenance of healthy weight, and the relationship of weight status and chronic disease prevention. Traditional and novel nutrition and exercise theories as well as current popular diet and exercise trends will be discussed.""Theory and application of adult learning as it relates to the role of nutrition in health promotion and disease prevention.  Discussion of nutrition education and interventions relative to the social-ecological model.  Factors to consider in developing the nutrition education/intervention practicum experience using the social-ecological model.  Focus on communication strategies for providing nutrition messages to diverse community audiences using various forms of media and outreach (print, radio, TV, newspaper, consumer publications, websites, community venues).  Development of nutrition messages using various forms of media for a target population.""An independent course focused on medical terminology, abbreviations, and simple clinical mathematical calculations.""Review of federal legislative and regulatory processes and documents related to food and food ingredients.  Discussion of federal food safety programs, food distribution programs, related programs, and key agencies.  Exploration of analogous State of Iowa processes, programs, and agencies.""Basis of food quality control/assurance programs and establishment of decision-making processes using official (government and industry) instrumental, chemical, and sensory procedures. Statistical process and quality control procedures and their applications to various food systems. Development of hazard analysis procedures, specifications, grades, and standards.""Sensory test methods and procedures used to evaluate the flavor, color and texture of foods. Relationships between sensory and instrumental measurements of color and texture. Acceptance and preference testing.""Examination of the various factors in the production of foods of animal origin, from animal production through processing, distribution and final consumption which contribute to the overall microbiological safety of the food. The two modules of this course will be 1) the procedures and processes which can affect the overall microbiological safety of the food, and 2) the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) system.""Experience in identifying quality defects in dairy products including milk, cottage cheese, cheddar cheese, strawberry yogurt, butter, and vanilla ice cream. Intensive training for the National Collegiate Dairy Products Evaluation competition and for dairy product evaluation in the food industry."An introduction to the theory and application of physical and chemical methods for determining the constituents of food. Modern separation and instrumental analysis. Use of food composition data bases."Application of food science principles to ingredient substitutions in food products.  Laboratory procedures for standard formulations and instrumental evaluation, with emphasis on problem-solving and critical thinking.""Principles of developing consumer packaged food products. Application of skills gained in food chemistry, formulation, microbiology, and processing. Some pilot plant experiences. Electronic communication from web emphasized for class reports, notes and assignments.""Pathogenesis of human microbiological foodborne infections and intoxications, principles of toxicology, major classes of toxicants in the food supply, governmental regulation of foodborne hazards. Assessed service learning component.   Only one of FS HN 419 and FS HN 519 may count toward graduation.""Effects of microbial growth in foods. Methods to control, detect, and enumerate microorganisms in food and water. Foodborne infections and intoxications."Standard techniques used for the microbiological examination of foods. Independent and group projects on student-generated questions in food microbiology. Emphasis on oral and written communication and group interaction."Sustainability, cleaner production. Taxonomy, kinetics, metabolism, microbial cultivation, aerobic and anaerobic fermentation. Antibiotics, food supplements, fermented foods, vitamin production. Biofuels, bioenergy and coproducts. Mass/energy balances, process integration, pretreatment, separation. Membrane reactors, bioelectrolysis, microbial fuel cells, nanotechnology, genetic engineering, mutagenesis.""In-depth discussion, synthesis, and analysis of domestic and international food issues including: food systems from farm to fork, poverty and world hunger, overnutrition, population, agriculture and the environment, ethics, biotechnology, and policy."(Dual-listed with NUTRS 561) Pathophysiology of selected chronic disease states and their associated medical problems. Specific attention will be directed to medical nutrition needs of patients in the treatment of each disease state.Dual-listed with NUTRS 563. Survey of current public health nutrition problems among nutritionally vulnerable individuals and groups. Discussion of the multidimensional nature of those problems and of community programs addressing them. Grant writing as a means for funding community nutrition program development. Significant emphasis on written and oral communication at the lay and professional level.  Field trip.(Dual-listed with NUTRS 564) Pathophysiology of selected acute and chronic disease states and their associated medical problems. Specific attention will be directed to medical nutrition needs of patients in the treatment of each disease state."Application of counseling and learning theories with individuals and groups in community and clinical settings. Includes discussion and experience in building rapport, assessment, diagnosis, intervention, monitoring, evaluation, and documentation.""Understanding the molecular basis for the role of diet in the development and prevention of common diseases such as diabetes, cancer, and vascular diseases.  Translating this understanding into practical approaches for improving the health of individuals and populations.""Principles and applications of food processing by application of heat (blanching, pasteurization, canning, extrusion, evaporation and distillation, extrusion and dehydration) and by removal of heat (refrigeration and freezing). Emphasis on solving problems in laboratory and recitation sessions.""Principles and applications of food processing by biological (fermentation, enzymes) and nontraditional (high pressure, irradiation, pulsed electric field) preservation methods.  Includes packaging, waste water treatment, and sanitation.  Emphasis on solving problems in laboratory and recitation sessions."Presentation of current topics using written and oral communication to a lay audience.  Emphasis on communication skills for the profession.Capstone seminar for the food safety minor. Case discussions and independent projects about safety issues in the food system from a multidisciplinary perspective."Independent work in food science, nutrition, or dietetics.   A maximum of 6 credits of FS HN 490 may be used toward graduation.""Independent work in food science, nutrition, or dietetics.   A maximum of 6 credits of FS HN 490 may be used toward graduation.""Independent work in food science, nutrition, or dietetics.   A maximum of 6 credits of FS HN 490 may be used toward graduation.""Independent work in food science, nutrition, or dietetics.   A maximum of 6 credits of FS HN 490 may be used toward graduation.""Independent work in food science, nutrition, or dietetics.   A maximum of 6 credits of FS HN 490 may be used toward graduation.""Independent work in food science, nutrition, or dietetics.   A maximum of 6 credits of FS HN 490 may be used toward graduation.""Independent work in food science, nutrition, or dietetics.   A maximum of 6 credits of FS HN 490 may be used toward graduation."Supervised off-campus work experience relevant to the academic major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of 4 credits of FS HN 491 may be used toward graduation.Supervised off-campus work experience relevant to the academic major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of 4 credits of FS HN 491 may be used toward graduation.Supervised off-campus work experience relevant to the academic major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of 4 credits of FS HN 491 may be used toward graduation.Supervised off-campus work experience relevant to the academic major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of 4 credits of FS HN 491 may be used toward graduation.Supervised off-campus work experience relevant to the academic major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of 4 credits of FS HN 491 may be used toward graduation."Students will develop and implement research projects with faculty supervision, based on knowledge gained from nutrition, biology and chemistry courses. Students will prepare a research proposal, conduct research and report results.  Students will gain appreciation for independent research and experience creative and innovative aspects of nutrition research.""Selected topics in food preparation including scientific principles, culture and culinary techniques. Variable format may include laboratory, recitation, and lecture.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Students will develop, implement and assess a community-based project that engages groups in learning and practicing concepts related to nutrition and wellness. Assessed service learning component.""(One credit per week traveled and 1 credit for pre-departure class, if offered.) Limited enrollment. Tour and study of food industry, culinary science, dietetic and nutritional agencies in different regions of the world. Pre-travel session arranged. Travel expenses paid by students.""(One credit per week traveled.) Limited enrollment. Tour and study of food industry, dietetic and nutritional agencies in different regions of the world. Pre-travel session arranged. Travel expenses paid by students.""(One credit per week traveled.) Limited enrollment. Tour and study of food industry, dietetic and nutritional agencies in different regions of the world. Pre-travel session arranged. Travel expenses paid by students."Required for students completing professional work periods in a cooperative education program. Students must register prior to commencing each work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Research under staff guidance.   A maximum of 6 credits of FS HN 499 may be used toward graduation."Sensory test methods and procedures used to evaluate the flavor, color and texture of foods. Relationships between sensory and instrumental measurements of color and texture. Acceptance and preference testing.""Examination of the various factors in the production of foods of animal origin, from animal production through processing, distribution and final consumption which contribute to the overall microbiological safety of the food. The two modules of this course will be 1) the procedures and processes which can affect the overall microbiological safety of the food, and 2) the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) system."Key principles and applications in the chemistry of food. This course is designed for graduate students with no previous food chemistry background. (offered online only)."Principles of developing consumer packaged food products. Application of skills gained in food chemistry, formulation, microbiology, and processing. Some pilot plant experiences. Electronic communication from web emphasized for class reports, notes and assignments."Key principles and applications in the processing of food. This course is designed for graduate students with no previous food processing background. Offered online only.Key principles and applications in the microbiology of food. This course is designed for graduate students with no previous food microbiology background. Offered online only."Basic principles of toxicology. Toxicants in the food supply: modes of action, toxicant defense systems, toxicant and nutrient interactions, risk assessment. Assessed service learning component.   Only one of FS HN 419 and FS HN 519 may count toward graduation.""This course deals with the identification, enumeration, and characterization of bacteria, yeasts, and mold associated with foods and food processing.  Effects of physical and chemical agents on micro-organisms will be studied.  Microbiological problems in food spoilage, food preservation, food fermentation, and food-borne disease will be discussed.  Offered online only.""This course will cover basic principles in biotechnology and applied food microbiology, including current topics of interest in food biotechnology.  Students will be introduced to recombinant DNA techniques and how they are applied to genetically modify microorganisms, the use of nucleic acids as tools of rapid detection of microorganisms in foods, basic enzyme immobilization and down-stream processing techniques, and regulatory aspects of food biotechnology.  Offered online only.""Multidisciplinary food safety and security perspectives provided by numerous subject matter experts.  Topics include food safety policy, ag bioterrorism, border security, animal ID, food defense and site security, risk analysis, crisis communication, epidemiology, HACCP, and more.  Offered online only.""Food Microbiology looks at the nature, physiology, and interactions of microorganisms in foods.  The course is an introduction to food-borne diseases, the effect of food processing systems on the microflora of foods, principles of food preservation, food spoilage, and foods produced by microorganisms.  Additionally, the course looks at food plant sanitation and criteria for establishing microbial standards for food products.  Offered online only."A comprehensive study of the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point System and its application in the food industry.  Offered online only."Understanding of the various factors that impact safety of ethnic and imported ethnic foods; knowledge about the handling, preparation, processing and storage of ethnic and imported foods and food products; science-based characterization of representative ethnic foods.  Offered online only.""Microbiology of fermented foods covers the physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of microorganisms important in food fermentations.  The course looks at how microorganisms are used in fermentations and the effects of processing and manufacturing conditions on production of fermented foods.  Offered online only.""This course will provide students with an understanding of the principles required in a food defense program for a food manufacturing, warehousing or distribution center.  The topics covered include: defining threats and aggressors; the Bioterrorism Act; food defense teams; vulnerability assessments; security programs; recall and traceability basics; security inspections; crisis management; emergency preparedness; and workplace violence.  Offered online only.""Mechanisms of action, metabolism, sources, remediation/detoxification, risk assessment of major foodborne toxicants of current interest, design of HAACP plans for use in food industries targeting foodborne toxicants, discussion of toxicants from a food defense perspective.  Offered online only.""Sustainability, cleaner production. Taxonomy, kinetics, metabolism, microbial cultivation, aerobic and anaerobic fermentation. Antibiotics, food supplements, fermented foods, vitamin production. Biofuels, bioenergy and coproducts. Mass/energy balances, process integration, pretreatment, separation. Membrane reactors, bioelectrolysis, microbial fuel cells, nanotechnology, genetic engineering, mutagenesis."Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Techniques. Includes: fermentation, protein isolation, protein purification, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, NMR, confocal microscopy and laser microdissection, Immunophenotyping, and monoclonal antibody production. Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."For students enrolled in the Dietetic Internship program only.  Supervised practice experience in operational management, medical nutrition therapy and community nutrition.  Experiences and activities designed to meet accreditation standards.""For students enrolled in the Dietetic Internship program only.  Supervised practice experience in operational management, medical nutrition therapy and community nutrition.  Experiences and activities designed to meet accreditation standards.""For students enrolled in the Dietetic Internship program only.  Supervised practice experience in operational management, medical nutrition therapy and community nutrition.  Experiences and activities designed to meet accreditation standards.""Application of counseling and learning theories with individuals and groups in community and clinical settings. Includes discussion and experience in building rapport, assessment, diagnosis, intervention, monitoring, evaluation, and documentation. Literature review of specific counseling and learning theories.""Principles and applications of food processing by application of heat (blanching, pasteurization, canning, extrusion, evaporation and distillation, extrusion and dehydration) and by removal of heat (refrigeration and freezing). Emphasis on solving problems in laboratory and recitation sessions.""Principles and applications of food processing by biological (fermentation, enzymes) and nontraditional (high pressure, irradiation, pulsed electric field) preservation methods.  Includes packaging, waste water treatment, and sanitation.  Emphasis on solving problems in laboratory and recitation sessions."This course will examine effect of industrial and domestic food processing on the nutrient content of food and risk of developing chronic disease.Orientation to and discussion of research interests in food science and nutrition. Discussion of policy and ethical issues in the conduct of research. Intended for entering students in FS HN.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Discussion and practice of oral presentation of scientific data in a professional setting. Discussion of issues related to data presentation. Intended for graduate students in their first or second semester in FS HN.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."(One credit per week traveled.) Limited enrollment. Tour and study of food industry, dietetic and nutritional agencies in different regions of the world. Pre-travel session arranged. Travel expenses paid by students.""(One credit per week traveled.) Limited enrollment. Tour and study of food industry, dietetic and nutritional agencies in different regions of the world. Pre-travel session arranged. Travel expenses paid by students.""(One credit per week traveled.) Limited enrollment. Tour and study of food industry, dietetic and nutritional agencies in different regions of the world. Pre-travel session arranged. Travel expenses paid by students."Nonthesis option only."Principles of instrumental measurements of color, aroma, flavor, texture, and rheology. Techniques and instrumentation for measuring the quality of foods; relationship of these methods to food color, taste, flavor, texture, and rheological quality. Application of methods to various foods and biorenewable materials.""Properties and applications of industrial enzymes important in food, feed, and bioprocessing, including biofuels and bioproducts. Characterization of enzyme catalytic mechanisms, kinetics, isolation, mutagenesis, and operating conditions, including evaluation of substrates, products, immobilization, enzyme inhibitors, pH, pressure, and temperature.""Structure and analysis of lipids; glyceride structure; crystal form and texture; autoxidation and chemical modification; extraction, refining and processing; applications of fats and oils in food, biofuel and biobased products.""Properties of proteins found in milk, eggs, meat, legumes, and cereal grains. Effect of processing on food proteins.""Study of chemical structures and physical properties of carbohydrates, applications of carbohydrates in foods and as biomaterial, and changes they undergo during processing and storage.""Topics of current interest in food microbiology, including new foodborne pathogens, rapid identification methods, effect of food properties and new preservation techniques on microbial growth, and mode of action of antimicrobials.""Provides an overview of rapid microbial detection methods for use in foods. Topics include historical aspects of rapid microbial detection, basic categories of rapid tests (phenotypic, genotypic, whole cell, etc.), existing commercial test formats and kits, automation in testing, sample preparation and ""next generation"" testing formats now in development."Presentation of thesis or dissertation research. May be taken once for M.S. program and twice for the Ph.D. program.Active listening and critical thinking activities related to research seminars in food science and human nutrition. Required each semester for all FSHN graduate students. Electronic documentation.Grant proposal preparation experiences including writing and critiquing of proposals and budget planning. Formation of grant writing teams in food science and/or nutrition.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Discussion of ecological concepts, individual tree structure and growth, variation and diversity in tree populations. Physical environment of trees and forests, ecological processes in forest communities, and introduction to different regional forest communities.""Basis for use of wood as an industrial raw material for lumber, composites, pulp and paper, energy and chemicals. Implications of use of alternative renewable and non-renewable materials for societal infrastructure and consumer goods.""Survey techniques involved in quantification, valuation, and evaluation of tree and stand growth and other variables in the forest environment (e.g., recreational use, wildlife habitat value, biomass, and solid wood).""Methods of decision-making related to forest ecosystems including communications, teams and conflict resolution. Current issues relating to public, private, and urban forests; quantification of processes, services, and goods produced by the forest and expected by the public such as wildlife, water, range, recreation, wilderness, biodiversity, as well as wood and fiber products.""Field and laboratory exercises integrating the evaluation and management of forest goods, services, and the processing of wood products.""Three-week field camp to address topics and issues covered in 201, 202, 203, 204, and 205.""Properties of wood and how they relate to its successful use. Comparative anatomical characteristics, scientific nomenclature, and hand lens identification of commercially important North American woods.""Core background and specialty topics in agricultural, and horticultural pesticide applicator certification. Students can select certification categories and have the opportunity to obtain pesticide applicator certification at the completion of the course. Commercial pesticide applicator certification is emphasized."Manipulation of forest vegetation based on ecological principles for the production of goods and services."Identification and ecology of North American woody plant species. Importance of woody plants in timber production and wildlife habitat. Natural disturbances, human impacts, management and restoration concerns for major North American forest regions will be addressed.""Survey of the major plant families, general, and representative species of the forest herbaceous layer. Functional ecology and restoration."Nature of insects and pathogens of forest and shade trees; their role in the dynamics of natural and     managed forest ecosystems; and the management of indigenous and exotic pests.Laboratory experience working with insect and fungal pests of trees."Change in forest species composition and structure at the stand and landscape scales resulting from site quality, tree growth, competition, succession, and disturbance. Methods for assessing tree growth and reconstructing past stand development. Applications to forest and savanna management."Application of economic principles to forest resource management considering both market and non-market goods and services. Methods of identifying and specifying problems in the management and use of forest resources. Application of mathematical and statistical models to the solution of managerial problems."Principles of planning, regulating, and decision-making associated with public and private lands, with consideration of forest, grassland, wetland, and freshwater aquatic ecosystems.  Integrated natural resources management within ecological, social, economic and policy constraints.""Integrated decision-making related to the conservation, management, and preservation of private and public forests, wildlands, urban/community forests, and/or the production and utilization of wood products. Student teams work with a client and develop management plans that incorporate ecological, social, economic, ethical, and institutional/political factors. Effective teamwork, written/oral/visual communication, and problem-solving stressed. Multiple trips to project site and client.""Discussion of establishment and management of woody perennials in community-owned urban greenspaces, consideration of urban site and soil characteristics, plant physiology, plant culture, urban forest valuation, inventory methods, species selection, and urban forest maintenance (health care and pest management)."Microscopic anatomy and ultrastructure of wood and other industrial lignocellulosic materials. Microscopy techniques for fiber analysis. Comparison of fiber properties.Chemical properties of lignocellulosic materials. Wood chemistry. Various conversion processes. Pulp and paper technology. Biobased products. Other fiber products. Cellulose derivatives. Term paper and/or student project required for graduate level.Deterioration of wood in use by biological and physical agents. Wood preservation and fire retardant treatments. Environmental impact of wood treating."Consolidation behavior of wood and other lignocellulosic materials.  Principles of adhesion.  Manufacturing processes for wood and lignocellulose composites such as plywood, oriented strand products, laminated lumber, particleboard, medium density fiberboard, and bast fiber products.  Extrusion processing of natural fiber/plastic composites.""Principles of moisture relations in hygroscopic materials; adsorption, desorption, equilibrium moisture content. Transport processes in natural materials such as wood. Drying processes for wood and other lignocellulosic materials. Influence of moisture on dimensional stability and durability of wood and lignocelluosic composites.""Mechanical, thermal, electrical, and acoustical properties of wood. Lumber grading and stress rating, nondestructive evaluation of wood and wood composite products.""Principles of planning, regulating, and decision-making associated with public and private lands, with consideration of forest, grassland, wetland, and freshwater aquatic ecosystems.  Integrated natural resources management within ecological, social, economic and policy constraints."Research seminars by faculty and graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Beginning level development of reading, writing, listening comprehension, and speaking in French, within the context of French culture. Credit by examination in the Department of World Languages and Cultures for courses numbered 101, 102, 201, and 202 is available only to students who are not currently enrolled in the course. Credit by examination for other courses in the Department is normally not available.""Beginning level development of reading, writing, listening comprehension, and speaking in French, within the context of French culture. Credit by examination in the Department of World Languages and Cultures for courses numbered 101, 102, 201, and 202 is available only to students who are not currently enrolled in the course. Credit by examination for other courses in the Department is normally not available.""Intermediate level development of reading, writing, listening comprehension, and speaking in French within the context of French culture. Credit by examination in the Department of World Languages and Cultures for courses numbered 101, 102, 201, and 202 is available only to students who are not currently enrolled in the course. Credit by examination for other courses in the Department is normally not available.""Intermediate level development of reading, writing, listening comprehension, and speaking in French within the context of French culture. Credit by examination in the Department of World Languages and Cultures for courses numbered 101, 102, 201, and 202 is available only to students who are not currently enrolled in the course. Credit by examination for other courses in the Department is normally not available."Emphasis on developing functional language skills in reading and writing. Selective review of grammar within the context of cultural and literary prose."Readings in French prose, theater and poetry. Introduction to close reading and analysis. Development of reading and writing skills for upper-level courses."Communication in business and professional contexts in French-speaking countries. Development of effective communication strategies and project management in the workplace. Cultural contexts of business and professional practice. Emphasis on working across French-American cultures. Preparation for internships.Intensive conversational and listening practice emphasizing contemporary France and the Francophone world. Native or near-native speakers are not eligible to enroll.Selected topics dealing with contemporary French society and culture."In-depth study of a selected filmmaker, genre, or movement.  Emphasis on analytical interpretation and relationship between film and French or Francophone culture, history, and society.""In-depth study of a selected topic, genre, movement or writer in French or Francophone literature, civilization or culture.  Emphasis on close readings and discussion.""Author, genre, or period study in French or Francophone history, literature, or culture. Readings, discussions, and papers in English.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Readings, discussions, and papers in English.""Analysis and interpretation of film in French society. Topics vary according to faculty interest. Film directors, genres, movements (e.g. The New Wave), historical survey, aesthetics, and cinematography. Readings, discussions and papers in English.""Advanced seminar in French civilization.  Topics vary according to faculty interest.  Readings, discussions, and paper in English."Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to focus on areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits in Frnch 490 may be counted toward graduation.Credits may be applied only to LCP major.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than 3 credits of Frnch 499 may be applied to the major."High level success at modern science requires entrepreneurship both in and outside the laboratory. Scientists are in a unique position to not only think, but to thrive, ""outside of the box"" and take unorthodox approaches to research that lead to positive paradigm shifts in our lives. Exploration of many facets of science, technology, industry and commerce, with frequent guest lectures from entrepreneurs.""In-depth investigations of modern research practices of transmission genetics. Designed for students interested in genetic research. Topics include: Mendelian genetic analysis, analysis of genetic pathways, mutational analysis of gene function, chromosomal mechanics, genetic mapping, epigenetic inheritance, human genetic analysis.""The principles of molecular genetics: gene structure and function at the molecular level, including regulation of gene expression, genetic rearrangement, and the organization of genetic information in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.""Photosynthesis, respiration, and other aspects of plant metabolism.""Cell biological processes including cell signaling, cell division, intracellular trafficking, biogenesis of organelles, cell adhesion and motility.""Fundamental principles in multicellular development. Emphasis on cellular and molecular regulation of developmental processes, and experimental approaches as illustrated in the current literature.""Statistical models and methods for genetics covering models of population processes: selection, mutation, migration, population structure, and linkage disequilibrium, and inference techniques: genetic mapping, linkage analysis, and quantitative trait analysis. Applications include genetic map construction, gene mapping, genome-wide association studies (GWAS), inference about population structure, phylogenetic tree construction, and forensic and paternity identification."Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Techniques. Includes: fermentation, protein isolation, protein purification, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, NMR, confocal microscopy and laser microdissection, Immunophenotyping, and monoclonal antibody production. Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Survey of key bioinformatics methods, including hands-on use of computational tools to solve various biological problems. Topics include: database searching, sequence alignment, gene prediction, RNA and protein structure prediction, construction of phylogenetic trees, comparative and functional genomics, and systems biology.""Plant nuclear and organelle genomes; regulation of gene expression; hormone signaling; organization, function, and development of plant cells and subcellular structures; regulation of plant growth and development.""Fundamental principles of neuroscience including cellular and molecular neuroscience, nervous system development, sensory, motor and regulatory systems.""Research methods and techniques; lectures, laboratory exercises and/or demonstrations representing individual faculty specialties."Advanced sequence models.  Basic methods in molecular phylogeny.  Hidden Markov models.  Genome annotation.  DNA and protein motifs. Introduction to gene expression analysis."Algorithmic and statistical approaches in computational functional genomics and systems biology. Elements of experiment design. Analysis of high throughput gene expression, proteomics, and other datasets obtained using system-wide measurements. Topological analysis, module discovery, and comparative analysis of gene and protein networks. Modeling, analysis, simulation and inference of transcriptional regulatory modules and networks, protein-protein interaction networks, metabolic networks, cells and systems: Dynamic systems, Boolean, and probabilistic models. Multi-scale, multi-granularity models. Ontology-driven, network based, and probabilistic approaches to information integration.""Topics may include molecular and cellular neuroscience, neurodevelopment, neuroplasticity, neurodegenerative diseases, cognitive neuroscience, sensory biology, neural integration, membrane biophysics, neuroethology, techniques in neurobiology and behavior.""Research seminars by faculty, invited speakers, and graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Faculty research series.Research seminars by faculty and graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Student and faculty presentations.Research for thesis or dissertation.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."This course is intended for first year students and others new to the genetics major.  Discussion of university policies and resources, requirements of the major, career opportunities, and other topics related to the first year experience."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Introduction to the principles of transmission and molecular genetics of plants, animals, and bacteria. Recombination, structure and replication of DNA, gene expression, cloning, quantitative and population genetics.   Students may receive graduation credit for no more than one of the following: Gen 260, Gen 313 and 313L, Gen 320, Biol 313 and 313L, and Agron 320.""Laboratory to accompany 313.   Students may receive graduation credit for no more than one of the following: Biol 313 and 313L, Gen 260, Gen 313, Gen 320, and Agron 320.""Transmission genetics with an emphasis on applications in agriculture, the structure and expression of the gene, how genes behave in populations and how recombinant DNA technology can be used to improve agriculture.   Credit for graduation will not be allowed for more than one of the following: Gen 260, 313, 320 and Biol 313 and 313L.""Genome sequencing, assembly, structural and functional annotation, and comparative genomics. Investigating these topics will develop skills in programming and scripting (Perl and/or Python), the use of biological databases, sequence alignment, homology search, identification of sequence patterns, construction of phylogenetic trees, and comparative genomics.""Fundamental concepts and current issues of human genetics. Human chromosome analysis, pedigree analysis, gene mapping, the human genome project, sex determination, genetics of the immune system, genetics of cancer, gene therapy, the genetic basis of human diversity, eugenics.""Analysis of genome, RNA, and protein data using computer technology to answer biological questions on topics ranging from microbial diversity to human health. An introduction for students in the life sciences to the fields of genomics, bioinformatics and systems."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."The principles of molecular genetics: gene structure and function at the molecular level, including regulation of gene expression,   genetic rearrangement, and the organization of genetic information in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.""The principles and practice of genetic analysis. Mendelian genetic analysis, mutational, transgenic, and genomic analysis of gene function, linkage and gene     mapping, chromosomal aberrations, aneuploidy and polyploidy, extrachromosomal inheritance, analysis of genetic pathways.""Broad overview of bioinformatics with a significant problem-solving component, including hands-on practice using computational tools to solve a variety of biological problems. Topics include: bioinformatic data processing, Perl programming, genome assembly, database search, sequence alignment, gene prediction, next-generation sequencing, comparative and functional genomics, and systems biology.""The genetic basis of evolutionary processes in higher organisms. The role of genetic variation in adaptation, natural selection, adaptive processes, and the influence of random processes on evolutionary change."Independent study in any area of genetics.   Students may use no more than 9 credits of university-wide 490 credits (including Gen 490) toward the total of 120 credits required for graduation."Communication within the discipline based on comprehension, discussion, presentation, and critical evaluation of original research literature; survey of career paths within the genetics disciplines and approaches to obtaining positions; exposure to research publication and grantsmanship processes; ethical issues in genetics research; outcomes assessment activities."For students registering to be undergraduate laboratory assistants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than 2 credits of GEN 490U or GEN 492 may be applied toward the Genetics advanced course requirement.Content varies from year to year.   Genetics students may use no more than 9 credits of university-wide 490-499 credits toward the total of 120 credits required for graduation."Attendance and critique of departmental seminars in BBMB, GDCB, or EEOB.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Genetics students may use no more than 9 credits of university-wide 490 - 499 credits toward the total of 120 credits required for graduation."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period.Independent research in any area of genetics.   Genetics students may use no more than 9 credits of university-wide 490-499 credits toward the total of 120 credits required for graduation.Independent research in any area of genetics; for Honors students only.   Genetics students may use no more than 9 credits of university-wide 490-499 credits toward the total of 120 credits required for graduation."Introduction to Bioethics through case study discussion and recent news events. Students will read and discuss contemporary issues in science ethics, including some of the following topics: ethics and responsible research practice, animal ethics and the use of animals in teaching and research, cloning, human reproductive and stem cell research, regulation of genetically modified crops and foods, plant biotechnology, gene patents.   Students will be divided into groups to develop their own case study, to be presented in class at the end of the term.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Contact individual faculty for special projects or topics.  Graded."Current topics in genetics research. Lectures by off-campus experts. Students read background literature, attend preparatory seminars, attend all lectures, meet with lecturers.""Research presentations by students to improve their ability to:  orally present scientific work in a clear and meaningful way, critically evaluate oral presentations, and give and receive constructive criticism. Students may enroll in one seminar per school year."Faculty research seminars that introduce students to the variety of genetics research projects on campus and provide an opportunity for students to become engaged in the scientific presentation to the point where they can think critically and ask meaningful questions."Landmark papers in the development of genetics concepts.  Papers are presented and discussions led by students, guided and mentored by the instructors.  Instructors provide a broad overview and history of the development of fundamental concepts in genetics."Graduate research projects performed under the supervision of selected faculty members in the graduate Genetics major.Research."How does the earth work, what is it made of, and how does it change through time? Plate tectonics, Earth materials, landforms, structures, climate, and natural resources. Emphasis on the observations and hypotheses used to interpret earth system processes. Students may also enroll in GEOL 100L.""Students will gain understanding of how Earth processes affect their lives and how they affect the Earth, and of the complex nature of the Earth and its processes. They will gain a deep knowledge of the methods used to understand the time scales and rates of Earth processes also through an applied research experience on groundwater and surface water.""An introduction to geologic processes and the consequences of human activity from local to global scales. Discussion of human population growth, resource depletion, pollution and waste disposal, global warming and ozone depletion, desertification, and geologic hazards such as earthquakes, landslides, flooding, and volcanism."The Earth's physical and biological evolution; concepts of global tectonics. Methods used to decipher earth history. Students majoring in geology must also enroll in GEOL 102L.Introduction to the use of sedimentary rocks and fossils in reconstructing the Earth's history."Offered in second half of the semester. Introduction to gems and gemstones, physical and optical properties of gems and gemstones, explanation of where gems come from and how they are found, how to distinguish between synthetic and naturally occurring gems, how the value of gems are determined, and the history of famous gems.""Fundamental concepts of Earth and Space Science, including the solar system, weather and climate, water and soils, plate tectonics, and geologic hazards. Online course format.""Inquiry-based lab exploring fundamental concepts of Earth and Space Science, including the solar system, weather and climate, water and soils, plate tectonics, and geologic hazards. Must be taken concurrently with GEOL/ASTRO 106.""Introduction to study of the oceans. Ocean exploration. Waves and currents. Shape, structure, and origin of the ocean basins. Sedimentary record of oceanic life. Composition of seawater and its significance for life. Ocean circulation and its influence on climate. Life of the oceans, including coral reefs. Use and misuse of ocean resources. Anthropogenic impacts on the oceanic environment.""Introduction to the catastrophic geologic processes that disrupt ecosystems and human activity. Includes a discussion on the role of plate tectonics, the hydrologic cycle, and humans as the driving forces behind selected case studies on volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, tsunamis, landslides, and floods. Summer - online only.""Orientation course for students enrolled in the Earth, Wind and Fire Learning Community. Provides an introduction to Iowa State University and meteorology, geology, and Earth science programs for students enrolled in the department's learning community. Activities include academic and social activities, talks and presentations on academic success, resume writing, and study abroad, as well as research talks by faculty members.""Study of the occurrence, history, development, and management of world water resources.  Basic hydrologic principles including climate, surface water, groundwater, and water quality.  Historical and current perspectives on water policy, use, and the role of water in society and the environment."Introduction to Earth materials and processes with emphasis on engineering and environmental applications.Independent study for freshman and sophomore students.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing the work period."Geologic mapping; structural, stratigraphic, sedimentologic, metamorphic, geomorphic, and environmental analyses. Study areas in the Bighorn Basin and Wind River Range and excursions to Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks. A 6-week summer field course required of all geology majors."Weekly seminar introduces students to a selected geological region or theme that is visited on a required ten-day field excursion. Introduction to field-safety leadership."Introduction to mineral classification, elementary crystal chemistry, crystal growth and morphology, mineral stability, and mineral associations.""Mineral identification methods, especially hand-specimen identification."Laboratory problems in mineral-identification methods utilizing optical microscopic techniques."Renewable and non-renewable energy resources. Origin, occurrence, and extraction of fossil fuels. Nuclear, wind, geothermal, biomass, hydroelectric, and solar energy. Biofuels. Energy efficiency. Environmental effects of energy production and use, including air pollution, acid precipitation, coal ash, mountaintop removal mining, oil drilling, hydraulic fracturing, groundwater contamination, nuclear waste disposal, and global climate change. Carbon sequestration and geoengineering solutions for reducing atmospheric CO2 concentrations.""Principles of stress and strain. Brittle and ductile behavior of rocks. Description, classification, and mechanics of formation of fractures, faults, folds, foliation, and lineation. Plate tectonics and regional geology. Laboratory includes application of geometrical techniques to solve structural problems; emphasizes map interpretation and use of stereonet and computer methods."Nature and origin of igneous and metamorphic rocks. Emphasis on important rock-forming environments and processes and their influence on rock characteristics. Laboratory includes thin section study of rock textures and mineralogy and the interpretation of these features."Exploration of the interplay between weathering, sedimentation, sea-level change, tectonics, and life through time that creates sedimentary rocks and stratigraphic packages. Understanding of the historical development of sedimentary geology through the development of petrography, paleontology, deep earth sampling, geophysical technologies, and geochemistry. Field and laboratory problem sets illuminate lecture material."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Examination of watersheds as systems, emphasizing the surface components of the hydrologic cycle.  Combines qualitative understanding of hydrological processes and uncertainty with quantitative representation.  Laboratory emphasizes field investigation and measurement of watershed processes.""Introduction to field methods used in groundwater investigations. In-field implementation of pumping tests, slug tests, monitoring well installation and drilling techniques, geochemical and water quality sampling, seepage meters, minipiezometers, stream gaging, and electronic instrumentation for data collection. Field trips to investigate water resource, water quality, and remediation projects.""Physical principles of groundwater flow, nature and origin of aquifers and confining units, well hydraulics, groundwater modeling, and contaminant transport. Lab emphasizes applied field and laboratory methods for hydrogeological investigations.""Introduction to the principles of modeling groundwater flow systems. Finite-difference and analytic-element methods, spreadsheet models, boundary conditions, calibration, sensitivity analysis, parameter estimation, particle tracking, and post-audit analysis. Application of MODFLOW to regional flow-system analysis. Computer laboratory emphasizes assigned problems that illustrate topics discussed in the course.""Introduction to mechanisms that drive climate, including the interplay between oceanic and atmospheric circulation and fluctuation in Earth's orbital parameters. Examination and analysis of past climate records ranging from historical documentation to ecological and geochemical proxies (e.g. tree ring analysis; O and C isotopes of skeletal carbonates and soils). Dating methods used to constrain and correlate climatic periods; utility of computer models to reconstruct past climates and predict future climate change. Emphasis placed on paleoclimatology and paleoecology of the late Quaternary (last ~1 million years).""Study of the basic principles of hydrologic modeling, including rainfall-runoff analysis, lumped and distributed modeling, conceptual and physical models, parameter estimation and sensitivity analysis, input and validation data, uncertainty analysis, and the use of models in surface water hydrology. A range of common models are applied to study hydrologic topics such as flood forecasting and land use change impacts. Previous experience with Matlab or other programming language is needed.""Geochemistry of natural waters and water-rock interactions. Acid-base equilibria, carbonate chemistry and buffer systems, mineral dissolution and precipitation, sorption, ion exchange, and redox reactions. Introduction to thermodynamics and kinetics. Laboratory emphasizes chemical analysis of waters and computer modeling."Geology and geochemistry of non-metallic and metallic ore deposits. Major processes that concentrate metals in the Earth. Geochemical conditions of ore formation using stable-isotope and fluid-inclusion studies.  Laboratory emphasizes the study of metallic ores."Introduction to the theory, methods and applications of stable isotopes. Primary focus on the origin, natural abundance, and fractionation of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen isotopes. Applications of isotopic occurrence for elucidation of physical, chemical, biological, and environmental processes. Effects of plant physiology, photosynthesis, trophic structure, diffusion, evaporation, chemical precipitation, soil and atmospheric processes, and environmental factors on isotope abundance.""Seismic, gravity, magnetic, resistivity, electromagnetic, and ground-penetrating radar techniques for shallow subsurface investigations and imaging. Data interpretation methods. Lab emphasizes computer interpretation packages. Field work with seismic - and resistivity-imaging systems and radar."Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) with particular emphasis on geoscientific data. Uses ESRI's ArcGIS Desktop Software and extension modules. Emphasizes typical GIS operations and analyses in the geosciences to prepare students for advanced GIS courses."Physics of elastic-wave propagation. Seismic surveys in environmental imaging, engineering, and petroleum exploration. Reflection and refraction techniques. Data collection, processing, and geological interpretation. Field work with state-of-the-art equipment.""The study of glaciers and glacial processes. Discussion of glaciology, glacial sediment transport, glacial landforms, and Quaternary history. Laboratory emphasizes topographic map interpretation and the Quaternary landscapes of Iowa.""The study of physical processes that shape Earth's surface. Topics include weathering, sediment transport, and landform genesis with emphasis on fluvial, glacial, hillslope, eolian, and coastal processes. Applications to engineering and environmental problems. Laboratory includes topographic map interpretation and local field trips.""GIS course with focus on the spatial analysis and modeling of raster data and triangulated irregular network (TIN) data. Uses ArcGIS and various extensions, such as Spatial Analyst, 3D Analyst, and ArcScene. Includes practical exercises during lectures, lab exercises, homework assignments, and (for GEOL 588) a class project.""Electromagnetic-radiation principles, active and passive sensors, multispectral and hyperspectral sensors, imaging radar, SAR, thermal imaging, lidar. Examples of applications. Also offered online S."Processing and analysis of satellite sensor data (optical and radar). Provides practical applications in an environmental context.No more than 9 credits of Geol 490 may be counted toward graduation.Weekly seminar on topics of current research interest.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Examination of watersheds as systems, emphasizing the surface components of the hydrologic cycle.  Combines qualitative understanding of hydrological processes and uncertainty with quantitative representation.  Laboratory emphasizes field investigation and measurement of watershed processes."Weekly seminar introduces students to a selected geological region or theme that is visited on a required ten-day field excursion. Graduate students are expected to assist in field teaching and safety leadership."On-site inspection of various ore deposits, mining operations, and terrains dominated by igneous or metamorphic rocks.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to field methods used in groundwater investigations. In-field implementation of pumping tests, slug tests, monitoring well installation and drilling techniques, geochemical and water quality sampling, seepage meters, minipiezometers, stream gaging, and electronic instrumentation for data collection. Field trips to investigate water resource, water quality, and remediation projects.""Physical principles of groundwater flow, nature and origin of aquifers and confining units, well hydraulics, groundwater modeling, and contaminant transport. Lab emphasizes applied field and laboratory methods for hydrogeological investigations.""Introduction to the principles of modeling groundwater flow systems. Finite-difference and analytic-element methods, spreadsheet models, boundary conditions, calibration, sensitivity analysis, parameter estimation, particle tracking, and post-audit analysis. Application of MODFLOW to regional flow-system analysis. Computer laboratory emphasizes assigned problems that illustrate topics discussed in the course.""Introduction to mechanisms that drive climate, including the interplay between oceanic and atmospheric circulation and fluctuation in Earth's orbital parameters. Examination and analysis of past climate records ranging from historical documentation to ecological and geochemical proxies (e.g. tree ring analysis; O and C isotopes of skeletal carbonates and soils). Dating methods used to constrain and correlate climatic periods; utility of computer models to reconstruct past climates and predict future climate change. Emphasis placed on paleoclimatology and paleoecology of the late Quaternary (last ~ 1 million years).""Study of the basic principles of hydrologic modeling, including rainfall-runoff analysis, lumped and distributed modeling, conceptual and physical models, parameter estimation and sensitivity analysis, input and validation data, uncertainty analysis, and the use of models in surface water hydrology. A range of common models are applied to study hydrologic topics such as flood forecasting and land use change impacts. Previous experience with Matlab or other programming language is needed.""Geochemistry of natural waters and water-rock interactions. Acid-base equilibria, carbonate chemistry and buffer systems, mineral dissolution and precipitation, sorption, ion exchange, and redox reactions. Introduction to thermodynamics and kinetics. Laboratory emphasizes chemical analysis of waters and computer modeling."Geology and geochemistry of non-metallic and metallic ore deposits. Major processes that concentrate metals in the Earth. Geochemical conditions of ore formation using stable-isotope and fluid-inclusion studies.  Laboratory emphasizes the study of metallic ores."Introduction to the theory, methods and applications of stable isotopes. Primary focus on the origin, natural abundance, and fractionation of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen isotopes. Applications of isotopic occurrence for elucidation of physical, chemical, biological, and environmental processes. Effects of plant physiology, photosynthesis, trophic structure, diffusion, evaporation, chemical precipitation, soil and atmospheric processes, and environmental factors on isotope abundance.""Seismic, gravity, magnetic, resistivity, electromagnetic, and ground-penetrating radar techniques for shallow subsurface investigations and imaging. Data interpretation methods. Lab emphasizes computer interpretation packages. Field work with seismic - and resistivity-imaging systems and radar."Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) with particular emphasis on geoscientific data. Uses ESRI's ArcGIS Desktop Software and extension modules. Emphasizes typical GIS operations and analyses in the geosciences to prepare students for advanced GIS courses."Structure and behavior of clay minerals, humic substances and biochar in soil environments, with emphasis on reactions and environmental implications.""Physics of elastic-wave propagation. Seismic surveys in environmental imaging, engineering, and petroleum exploration. Reflection and refraction techniques. Data collection, processing, and geological interpretation. Field work with state-of-the-art equipment.""Introduction to visualizing scientific information with 3D computer graphics and their foundation in human perception. Overview of different visualization techniques and examples of 3D visualization projects from different disciplines (natural sciences, medicine, and engineering). Class project in interactive 3D visualization using the ParaView, Mayavi, TVTK, VTK or a similar system.""The study of glaciers and glacial processes. Discussion of glaciology, glacial sediment transport, glacial landforms, and Quaternary history. Laboratory emphasizes topographic map interpretation and the Quaternary landscapes of Iowa.""The study of physical processes that shape Earth's surface. Topics include weathering, sediment transport, and landform genesis with emphasis on fluvial, glacial, hillslope, eolian, and coastal processes. Applications to engineering and environmental problems. Laboratory includes topographic map interpretation and local field trips.""GIS course with focus on the spatial analysis and modeling of raster data and triangulated irregular network (TIN) data. Uses ArcGIS and various extensions, such as Spatial Analyst, 3D Analyst, and ArcScene. Includes practical exercises during lectures, lab exercises, homework assignments, and (for GEOL 588) a class project.""Electromagnetic-radiation principles, active and passive sensors, multispectral and hyperspectral sensors, imaging radar, SAR, thermal imaging, lidar. Examples of applications. Also offered online S."Weekly seminar on topics of current research interest. All students seeking a graduate degree in geology must enroll during each semester of residence. Students pursuing a non-thesis option for the M.S. in Earth Science must enroll for one semester.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Weekly seminar on topics of current research interest. All students seeking a graduate degree in geology must enroll during each semester of residence. Students pursuing a non-thesis option for the M.S. in Earth Science must enroll for one semester.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Attendance only. Weekly seminar on topics of current research interest. All students seeking a graduate degree in geology must enroll during each semester of residence. Students pursuing a non-thesis option for the M.S. in Earth Science must enroll for one semester.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction to German language within the context of German culture; practice in the basic skills.Continuation of German 101."Review of grammar, selected readings, further practice in oral and written communication."Continuation of German 201. One section will emphasize the use of German in professional contexts.Emphasis on the development of reading skills through a variety of text types with a focus on German Culture from circa 1900 to 1933."Emphasis on writing skills, with further development of grammar and reading skills using a variety of current and historical materials."Communication in business and professional contexts in German-speaking countries. Development of effective communication strategies and project management in the workplace. Cultural contexts of business and professional practice. Preparation for internships.Intensive conversational and listening practice in German with an emphasis on a major German-speaking city."Selected topics dealing with contemporary German society and culture. Introduction to materials, resources, and forms of communication available on the Internet, and in other electronic and print media."Selected readings in German literature from Classicism to present. Emphasis on techniques of reading and analysis of literary texts.   No more than six credits of Ger 330 may be counted toward the major."Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women writers, cinema, or contemporary theory. Three credits: English, open to all students. Four credits: Required for German concentration credit, supplementary readings and compositions in German.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women writers, cinema, or contemporary theory. Three credits: English, open to all students. Four credits: Required for German concentration credit, supplementary readings and compositions in German.""Examination of such topics as the origins and expressions of Anti-Semitism in central Europe, the political events and structures of the Holocaust, the reality of ghettos and concentration camps, the impact of technological modernization on the Final Solution, and resistance to the Nazis. Materials will include non-fictional texts, literature, art, and music. Three credits: English, open to all students. Four credits: required for German major credit, supplementary readings and compositions in German. Four credits: required for German concentration credit, supplementary readings and compositions in German.""Introduction to Germanic antiquities, mythology, and heroic legends; Herder's concept of Naturpoesie. Emphasis on the Grimm tales: theoretical approaches to the tales from the late 19th and early 20th centuries; perversions of these traditional tales by the National Socialists (Nazis). Readings in contemporary Grimm scholarship. Taught in English. Three credits: English, open to all students. Four credits: required for German concentration credit, supplementary readings and compositions in German.""Analysis and interpretation of film or media in German society. Study of media production and reception within multicultural and global contexts. Thematic emphases based on faculty and student interest including: 1) film directors, genres, movements (e.g. New German Cinema), aesthetics, and cinematography or 2) media studies (e.g. television, mass press, popular culture). Three credits: English, open to all students. Four credits: required for German concentration credit, supplementary readings and compositions in German.""Supervised instruction in language and culture of Germany; formal class instruction at level appropriate to student's training, augmented by practical living experience.""Key topics and themes in German history and culture up to the modern era.  Three credits: Taught in English, open to all students.  Four credits: Required for German concentration credit, supplementary readings and compositions in German.""Designed to meet the needs of students who seek work in areas other than those in which courses are offered, or who desire to integrate a study of literature or language with special problems in major fields.   No more than 9 credits of Ger 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Work experience using German language skills in the public or private sector, combined with academic work under faculty supervision. Available only to majors and minors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Ger 499 may be repeated to a maximum of 6 credits. No more than 3 credits of Ger 499 may be applied to the major.""Introductory exploration of the health, individual and social factors associated with adult development including young adulthood, middle age and older adulthood. Information is presented from a life-span developmental framework."Consideration of death in the life span of the individual and the family with opportunity for exploration of personal and societal attitudes."Interchanges of the aged and their families. Emphasis on role changes, social interaction, and independence as influenced by health, finances, life styles, and community development.""Economic well-being in the context of demographic change, the present and future of Social Security, family retirement needs analysis, investment strategies and characteristics of retirement plans, helping others to work towards financial security, family economic issues for retired persons. Overview of employee and retirement benefits.""An interdisciplinary course designed for students who are interested in assistive technology, pervasive computing, mobile computing and principles of universal and inclusive design for end users, in particular, the elderly population. Students will work in semester-long projects as interdisciplinary teams to apply knowledge obtained from lectures and mutual presentations. For graduate credit students are required to submit a research report and give an oral presentation.""Emphasis on independent living within residential settings including specialized shelter, supportive services and housing management. Application of criteria appropriate for accessibility and functional performance of activities; universal design principles. Creative project provides service learning opportunities. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Prepracticum training for students planning a gerontology practicum. Exploration of possible agencies for the practicum, in-depth study of a selected agency, and development of goals and objectives for the practicum."Supervised field experience related to aging.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Consult program coordinator for procedure.Provides an overview of important gerontological issues."An interdisciplinary course designed for students who are interested in assistive technology, pervasive computing, mobile computing and principles of universal and inclusive design for end users, in particular, the elderly population. Students will work in semester-long projects as interdisciplinary teams to apply knowledge obtained from lectures and mutual presentations. For graduate credit students are required to submit a research report and give an oral presentation.""Women and Aging is the study of theory, research and application of issues related to women and the aging experience. This course will examine gender differences in areas such as health, mental health, income security, crime, and public policy.  Attention will be given to ways in which younger women can prepare to meet the challenges and opportunities awaiting them as they age.""Basic biological principles of aging. Course modules include an introduction to the aging process, body systems and normal aging, and environment and the biology of aging.  In addition, disorders and diseases of aging, prevention and treatment and exercise and aging topics will be covered.""Administration principles involved in the planning, organizing and directing of long-term care agencies.  Includes an in-depth exposure to federal and state standards and regulations governing long-term care.""Introduction to the range of issues involved in aging and mental health.  From a systems framework the major emotional and psychiatric problems encountered in old age will be examined including mood, anxiety, adjustment and personality disorders, dementia, cognitive problems, substance abuse, and suicide. Barriers to treatment and cohort and cultural issues will be explored.""Cognitive skills form the foundation for functioning in everyday life and these skills take on added importance in older adulthood. This course focuses on selected theoretical approaches and current research related to cognitive aging. We will review normative and non-normative cognitive changes, assessment techniques, and prevention/intervention efforts. Throughout the course we will keep the role of environment and life-span implications in the forefront of our discussion.""Overview of current aging issues including theory and research, critical social and political issues in aging, the interdisciplinary focus of gerontology, career opportunities, and aging in the future. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Exploration of the biological, psychological and social factors associated with aging. Although the focus is on the later years, information is presented from a life-span developmental framework. Empirical studies are reviewed and their strengths, limitations and implications for normative and optimal functioning are discussed. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."WWW only. Basic physiologic changes during aging and their impacts in health and disease. The focus will be on successful aging with special emphasis on physical activity and nutrition. Practical application to community settings is addressed.Policy development in the context of the economic status of the older adult population. Retirement planning and the retirement decisions; social security and public transfer programs; intra-family transfers to/from the aged; private pensions; financing medical care; prospects and issues for the future."Emphasis on independent living within residential settings including specialized shelter, supportive services and housing management. Application of criteria appropriate for accessibility and functional performance of activities; universal design principles. Creative project provides service learning opportunities. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Principles and procedures of universal design in response to the varying ability level of users. Assessment and analysis of existing buildings and sites with respect to standards and details of accessibility for all people, including visually impaired, mentally impaired, and mobility restricted users. Design is neither a prerequisite nor a required part of the course. Enrollment open to students majoring in related disciplines. Credit counts toward fulfillment of History, Theory, Culture requirements."Theories and research related to personal and family adjustments in later life affecting older persons and their intergenerational relationships. Related issues including demographics also are examined through the use of current literature. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Overview of program evaluation, research methods, and grant writing in gerontology. Includes application of quantitative and qualitative methods in professional settings. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Consult program coordinator for procedure.Supervised exerperience in an area of gerontology."An integrative experience for gerontology students designed to be taken near the end of the degree program. By applying knowledge gained in earlier coursework, students will strengthen skills in ethical decision-making behavior, applying these skills in gerontology-related areas such as advocacy, professionalism, family and workplace issues. Students from a variety of professions will bring their unique perspectives to bear on topics of common interest. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""An introduction to Global Resource Systems (GRS) program. University and career acclimation, development of educational and professional skills, participation in GRS Learning Community.  Assessed service-learning component."A comparative analysis of global resources and the various natural and human systems affecting those resources.  Assessed service-learning component.Discussion of topics of current importance in global resource systems.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of 3 credits of 211 may be used towards degree requirements."An introduction to the key global issues in sustainability. Focuses on interconnected roles of energy, materials, human resources, economics, and technology in building and maintaining sustainable systems. Applications discussed will include challenges in both the developed and developing world and will examine the role of technology in a resource-constrained world.   Cannot be used for technical elective credit in any engineering department.""Practical work experience in approved domestic or international settings such as with a company, research laboratory, governmental agency or non-governmental organization.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Independent study on topics of special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Intended primarily for first-year students and sophomores.Independent study on topics of special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Intended primarily for first-year students and sophomores."In-depth analysis of the opportunities, constraints and consequences of the resource systems common in industrialized nations. Topics integrate natural resources with land tenure, societal structure, food security, agriculture, shelter, energy and wealth dynamics.""In-depth appraisal of resource systems common throughout the developing world. Topics integrate natural resources with land tenure, societal structure including gender issues, food security, agriculture, shelter, energy and wealth dynamics and effectiveness of global programs aimed at sustainable development.""Students enrolled in this course intend to enroll in GLOBE 321 or 322 in the following term.  Topics provide a pre-departure orientation, including logistical, academic, cultural, and personal requirements for completion of an experiential supervised work experience."A supervised learning experience including an analysis of an international location's resource system via immersion in a foreign culture lasting at least five weeks. The experience should focus on the region consistent with the student's degree track.  Course expenses paid by student.   A maximum of 12 credits of GLOBE 321 and 322 may be used for degree requirements.A supervised learning experience including an analysis of a domestic location's resource system via immersion in a different culture within the United States lasting at least five weeks. Designed for international students and for students who are not in a position to leave the United States.  Course expenses paid by student.   A maximum of 12 credits of Globe 321 and 322 may be used for degree requirements."Current problems of developing countries, theories of economic development, agriculture, and economic development, measurement and prediction of economic performance of developing countries, alternative policies and reforms required for satisfying basic needs of Third World countries, interrelationships between industrialized countries and the developing countries, including foreign aid."Research project in collaboration with faculty that complements and furthers a student's experiences from GLOBE 321 and 322 while simultaneously bringing into focus entire four-year experience. Student will write a research report and make either an oral or poster presentation.Research project in collaboration with faculty that complements and furthers a student's experiences from GLOBE 321 and 322 while simultaneously bringing into focus entire four-year experience. Student will write a research report and make either an oral or poster presentation."Capstone analysis of critical global resource challenges facing both developed and developing countries.  Students will use research skills to investigate specific global resource issues and use communications skills to work as a team to integrate their research, develop an interdisciplinary perspective, and evaluate potential solutions to resource challenges.""An overview of animal agriculture with emphasis on animal agriculture in developing countries. Historical, economic, environmental; and political considerations will be assessed and evaluated. Issues related to gender, resilience and sustainability for different production systems will be investigated.""Interdisciplinary study and analysis of agricultural systems, sustainable management, and impact on plants and animal biodiversity. International field experience in evaluating different agricultural systems and impact on biodiversity may be required. A program fee is charged to students for international study abroad."Independent study on topics of special interest to the student.  Comprehensive report required. Intended primarily for juniors and seniors.   A maximum of 9 credits of all (university-wide) 490 courses may be used for degree requirements.Independent study on topics of special interest to the student.  Comprehensive report required. Intended primarily for juniors and seniors.   A maximum of 9 credits of all (university-wide) 490 courses may be used for degree requirements.Independent study on topics of special interest to the student.  Comprehensive report required. Intended primarily for juniors and seniors.   A maximum of 9 credits of all (university-wide)490 courses may be used for degree requirements.Independent study on topics of special interest to the student.  Comprehensive report required. Intended primarily for juniors and seniors.   A maximum of 9 credits of all (university-wide) 490 courses may be used for degree requirements.Independent study on topics of special interest to the student.  Comprehensive report required. Intended primarily for juniors and seniors.  Assessed service-learning component.   A maximum of 9 credits of all (university-wide) 490 courses may be used for degree requirements.Selected projects that result in outcomes benefiting a non-Iowa State University entity while instilling a professional ethics and accomplishing student learning goals.  Course expenses paid by student.  Assessed service-learning component.Selected projects that result in outcomes benefiting a non-Iowa State University entity while instilling a professional ethics and accomplishing student learning goals.  Course expenses paid by student.  Assessed service-learning component.Selected projects that result in outcomes benefiting a non-Iowa State University entity while instilling a professional ethics and accomplishing student learning goals.  Course expenses paid by student.  Assessed service-learning component."Global resource systems topics will include the agricultural industries, climate, crops, culture, economics, food, geography, government, history, livestock, marketing, natural resources, public policies, soils, and preparation for travel to locations to be visited. Students enrolled in this course intend to register for GLOBE 494A, 496 or 497 the following term."Extended field trips abroad to study global resource systems.  Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged through GLOBE 495. Trip expenses paid by student."An integrated agricultural and food production and policy program that allows students to assess, analyze and evaluate complex, country-specific situations and to develop their skills, knowledge and abilities via team-oriented projects that involve complex issues such as development of effective foreign food aid and agricultural and food production systems, drivers of world hunger, sustainable resource management and efficacy of policy, and the role of the USA and the United Nations and other development agencies in these systems. International location and duration of program will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged through GLOBE 495. Trip expenses paid by students."Research projects in collaboration with faculty."Reporting original research results within the norms for writing of a student's discipline. Emphasis on preparing thesis/dissertation chapters that will be both acceptable to the Graduate College and ready for submission to a refereed journal in the student's discipline. Focus on reporting student-generated data, norms for discourse within disciplines, and how thesis chapters differ from journal manuscripts."Ethical and legal issues facing researchers in the sciences and engineering.Reading and reviewing manuscripts; publishing papers; oral and poster presentations.Balancing life and career; mentoring; lab management."Applying and interviewing for academia, industry and government."Writing a winning proposal."Preparation of a teaching portfolio and course materials; lecturing, technology.""Introduction to faculty life issues such as hiring, tenure, teaching, and service at a variety of higher education institutions. Includes presentations from faculty at other institutions.""Consideration of a wide range of faculty life issues. Includes topics such as higher education trends, diversity issues, learning styles, assessment, grant and proposal writing, and legal and ethical issues. Written components include job and teaching portfolios."Students complete a stand-alone teaching assignment at Iowa State or another higher education institution. Written components include pedagogical documents.In-depth study of topic providing academic professional development.Reserved for graduate students the term they take the final oral examination. Students must have completed all required coursework and not be registered for another non-R Credit course."Reserved for graduate students who must be registered for a particular term, but are not required to take additional coursework."Only for students not registered in other courses in the summer term.Reserved for Ph.D. candidates only. See the Graduate College Handbook for specific requirements.Professional work period.Basic design concepts and color principles used for visual communication."Principles of typographic composition, structure and hierarchy. Formal and conceptual principles of symbology.""This course will address the development of ""seeing"" as a medium design, expression, and visual communication including compositional dynamics, advanced digital image manipulation, software usage and support, digital camera operations along with scanning and other digital input devices, color management, digital format for presentation and printing with digital ready formats."Basic 2-dimensional computer skills for graphic design.Basic 3-dimensional computer skills for graphic design."Introduction to basic principles of visual communication that contribute to the successful comprehension of intended visual messages; these include promotional messages, such as corporate branding and marketing campaigns, as well as informational messages, such as those used in computer interface design or in the clear presentation of diagrammatic data. Emphasis is placed on sensitivity to the diversity of the intended American or global audience, and to the cross-cultural differences that may affect the ways that visual messages are interpreted. Methods for creating brand experiences are explored as they apply to both small and large enterprises, ranging from personal brand to corporate brand identities."Creation and design of images and symbols for communication. Application and integration of typography with images and symbols."Development and preparation of design concepts for application to the printing and electronic publishing process. Creative problem-solving skills, introduction to systems design.""Lecture about the processes and materials involved in graphic design arts reproduction. Course covers pre-press, paper selection and specification, ink systems, type systems and fonts, output technology, printing presses and bindery operations.""Procedural and ethical concerns related to the graphic design internship. Personal goals, preparation of resume and plans for internship. Study and tours of areas of interest within the graphic design profession.""Lecture, discussion and writing about the critical issues facing the communications field today and in the future.""Late nineteenth century to the 1990s. This course will explore the cultural, social, political, industrial, and technological forces that have influenced the practice of graphic design in Britain, Europe, and the United States. Students will study the historical issues and problems facing designers, their clients, and their publics.""Critical issues that affect the contemporary practice of graphic design as it relates to the United States. Students will study a variety of issues that include, but are not exclusive to, new media, gender, class, design and the public sphere, design as social action, postmodern design theory, sustainability, and ethical practice.""Travel, study, and tours of areas of interest within the graphic design profession such as print production companies, design studios, and museums.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Advanced design systems as applied to corporate identity and environmental graphic design. Symbology as an integrated component of communication systems."Experience design and innovation in a multi-disciplinary design studio. Class will use unique research, design, evaluation, creativity, and innovation methodologies to solve human problems on special topics. Designed solutions will be in the form of products, artifacts, interfaces, information, and human environments."Photography as a tool for creating conceptually-driven images and metaphors. Emphasis is on photography as an evocative storytelling device for a range of audiences and design applications. Compositional and technical aspects are explored to ensure successful interpretation of the photograph's intended message."The design of visual, aural and textual communication for electronic media.""Visual communication applied to exhibition design focusing on educational or interactive museum exhibitions, trade show booth design, and modular unit design for traveling exhibitions. Translation of graphic information to a three-dimensional space.""Typographic theory exploring traditional and non-traditional forms, both historical and contemporary typographic achievements.""Analysis and application of scientific, systematic, and non-traditional problem-solving and problem-seeking techniques."Graphic design outreach and problem solving. Individual and group projects for non-profit clients selected by the instructor."The development of advanced and experimental web design for the applications of e-commerce, education and the communication of visual information.""Study of the navigational challenges of built environments and outdoor spaces, including site analysis, development of navigational plans, and design of wayfinding sign systems.  Issues of function, accessibility, legibility, and fabrication are considered."Graphic design experience in an off-campus professional environment."Professional design management: ethics, setting up a new business, client/designer relationships, contractual options, billing practices, and effective operating procedures.""Exploration and development of the graphic design portfolio and resume in electronic, print, and photographic form."Special issues related to graphic design. Topics vary each time offered.Student must have completed related graphic design coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed related graphic design coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed related graphic design coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed related graphic design coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed related graphic design coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed related graphic design coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis."The philosophy, concepts and structures of magazine design.""The philosophy, concepts and structures of book design."Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered.Cultural and historical aspects of art and design in Western Europe in preparation for study abroad. Area of study varies each time offered.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."International study abroad program in western Europe. Visits to design studios, art museums, and educational facilities.""Study and tours of museums, galleries, artist and/or designer studios and other areas of interest within art and design.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Theory and investigation of systems, structures, principles of visual organization, and typography for communication. Studio problems will be influenced by social, cultural, environmental, or technological factors.""Investigation and application of signs, symbols and semiotic theory for communication. Studio problems influenced by social, cultural, environmental, or technological factors."Photography as a tool for creating conceptually-driven images and metaphors. Emphasis is on photography as an evocative storytelling device for a range of audiences and design applications. Compositional and technical aspects are explored to ensure successful interpretation of the photograph's intended message."The design of visual, aural and textual communication for electronic media.""Visual communication applied to exhibition design focusing on educational or interactive museum exhibitions, trade show booth design, and modular unit design for traveling exhibitions. Translation of graphic information to a three-dimensional space.""Typographic theory exploring traditional and non-traditional forms, both historical and contemporary typographic achievements.""Analysis and application of scientific, systematic, and non-traditional problem-solving and problem-seeking techniques.""The development of advanced and experimental web design for the applications of e-commerce, education and the communication of visual information.""Study of the navigational challenges of built environments and outdoor spaces, including site analysis, development of navigational plans, and design of wayfinding sign systems.  Issues of function, accessibility, legibility, and fabrication are considered."Special issues related to graphic design. Topics vary each time offered."Late nineteenth century to the 1990s. This course will explore the cultural, social, political, industrial, and technological forces that have influenced the practice of graphic design in Britain, Europe, and the United States. Students will study the historical issues and problems facing designers, their clients, and their publics.""Critical issues that affect the contemporary practice of graphic design as it relates to the United States. Students will study a variety of issues that include, but are not exclusive to, new media, gender, class, design and the public sphere, design as social action, postmodern design theory, sustainability, and ethical practice.""Issues in ethics and decision-making as they relate to technology, design, design research, HCI, and the design industry."Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment."The philosophy, concepts and structures of magazine design.""The philosophy, concepts and structures of book design."Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered."International study abroad program in western Europe. Visits to design studios, art museums, and educational facilities.""Introduction to teaching methods, curriculum design, project development, and business strategies for Design Education and Professional Practice.""The theory and investigation of experience design as it applies to human interactions in contemporary society and culture. Studio problems may involve such areas as: exhibition design, electronic interface design, wayfinding, package design, and publication design.""The exploration and design of interface/interaction with products, systems, and technologies.""The exploration and design of educational experiences and artifacts as they relate to the social, emotional, and behavioral aspects of society.""The theory and investigation of experience design as it applies to human interactions in contemporary society and culture. Studio problems may involve such areas as: exhibition design, electronic interface design, wayfinding, package design, and publication design."Selected issues in contemporary graphic design. Topics and readings vary each time offered."Grammar and vocabulary of ancient Greek, within the context of Greek culture; reading knowledge through texts adapted from classical authors.""Grammar and vocabulary of ancient Greek, within the context of Greek culture; reading knowledge through texts adapted from classical and later authors.""Emphasis on grammatical principles, composition and reading classical or Hellenistic texts.""Readings in ancient Greek Literature with emphasis on critical analysis of style, structure or thought.""Designed to meet the needs of students who seek work in areas other than those in which courses are offered, or who desire to integrate a study of literature or language with special problems in major fields.   No more than 9 credits of Greek 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Discussion and application of the basic techniques of utilizing bloodborne pathogen safety measures,  administering first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. ARC layperson certification available.""Physical, mental, emotional and social aspects of health as a basis for understanding and preventing health problems. False and misleading advertising and effects of cultists and faddists on consumer health. Study of legislation and agencies concerned with consumer protection and health insurance.""Discussion of use, abuse and addiction of mood modifying substances in contemporary society. Includes study of tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs."The application of instructional strategies related to health education and physical education for teachers at the elementary level.   Credit for both H S 275 and 375 may not be applied toward graduation.Pre-internship experience with a health or fitness organization based on option.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Discussion and practice of skills needed to teach first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. ARC certification available."Introduction to community health problems, programs of prevention, environmental health agencies, and health services. Study of local, state, and national community health agencies, their purposes and functions.""Discussion of disease process and ill-health in the twentieth century. Emphasis on epidemiology, prevention, treatment, and the understanding of the etiology of communicable and noncommunicable diseases.""Principles, methods, materials, and resources involved in the teaching of health. Includes organization and development of the health education curriculum (K-12).   Credit for both H S 275 and 375 may not be applied toward graduation."The design and implementation of worksite health promotion programs and the benefits these programs have for both employees and employers. Review of various health risk appraisals and planning theory-based incentive programs designed to promote positive lifestyles.Search techniques and preparation of relevant material for work and/or professional school admission. Information specifically related to health care and kinesiology fields.  Field experience process and procedures will be reviewed."History and legal basis of school health programs. Procedures for developing, organizing, administering, and evaluating a modern program of health services, healthful school living, and health instruction. Includes administration, community and school relationships."Advance registration required.Students must be fully admitted to Teacher Education and must apply for approval to enroll at the beginning of the semester prior to registering.Students must be fully admitted to Teacher Education and must apply for approval to enroll at the beginning of the semester prior to registering."Techniques of needs assessment, program design, administration, and evaluation of community health education programs in various settings.""Understanding health benefits of physical activity on chronic disease prevention and health promotion throughout the life span, from clinical and public health perspectives.  Discussion and application of real-life physical activity assessment, research, guidelines, and promotion in population levels."Advance registration required. Supervised experience in health promotion field.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Understanding health benefits of physical activity on chronic disease prevention and health promotion throughout the life span, from clinical and public health perspectives.  Discussion and application of real-life physical activity assessment, research, guidelines, and promotion in population levels.""Historical development of higher education; diversity, functions, and philosophies of colleges and universities; federal and state roles; review of general, liberal, technical, graduate, and professional education.""Serving as an introduction to developing practicing leaders, this course will create the foundation   upon which enduring understanding of leadership will be built.  Specifically explored will be   learning as the foundation of human enterprise, everyday leadership, determination of common good,   roots of individual's actions, sensitivity to others, merits of divergent ideas, questioning the   status quo, ethics as personal responsibility and choosing to grow.""Serving as the second semester in a program to develop practicing leaders, this course will build   upon the foundation started first semester to help students embrace the enduring understandings of   leadership.  Specifically explored will be team learning and the effect on individuals, skills   required for a team to move forward, importance of decisions based on the good of the community,   reflection as a means of enhancing learning, and interconnectedness of the individual, the   community, and the world.""The overall purpose of this course is to expand the foundation started in Foundations of   Leadership: Learning, Ethics, Self and Interactions and Learning, Leadership, Ethics and Community   for developing practicing leadership.  The focus will shift from a naive understanding of the   concepts of self within a team and community to a more sophisticated understanding of knowing,   being and doing leadership.""The purpose of this last (in a series of four) course is to allow students to put their knowledge,   skills, and abilities related to leadership, learning, Ethics and Teams into practice.  In addition   to         planning and implementing a major service learning project, the focus will be on the   next wave of the study of leadership - connecting leadership to the research about the brain and   human learning.""First of two-course series to help leaders develop the knowledge and skills to engage the collective capacity of a group to think, learn, and achieve important purpose.  The foundation for developing deep understanding about leadership, learning, and the relationships therein.  Focus on application of recent knowledge about human learning in the professional practice of leadership. Relationship leadership model and relationship to other leadership models, theories, and concepts; current theories of human learning (including expert/novice and transfer of learning), and interrelationships with leadership practice; critical understanding of self; facilitating learning for others; metacognition as a habit of mind; fundamentals of group interaction theories; social interdependence, communication, trusting, trustworthy goals, decision-making, cohesion, controversy, team development; power, resources, and development of community.""Second of a two-course series designed to help leaders develop the knowledge and skills to best engage the collective capacity of a group to think, learn and achieve important purpose. Builds on foundation course to support students in creating applications of the relationships between leadership and learning.  Focus on developing the habits of mind and habits of practice to best use knowledge about human learning in the professional practice of leadership. Applications of relational leadership model; applications of group interaction theories; development and implementation of action plans to achieve measurable goals; application of current theories of human learning as they relate to leadership; exploration of the fundamentals of emotional intelligence and the impacts on leadership; developing critical habits of mind to practice leadership focused on learning.""Current issues and practices in community college teaching and learning, and the roles and responsibilities of teachers as leaders.""Educational theories, methods and strategies for the improvement of college instruction.   Assist potential college instructors in developing knowledge of protocol, assessment, and the   scholarship and art of teaching. Emphasis on the unique challenge of college teaching in a changing student population environment.""Modes of curriculum design, development, and change in colleges. Development of curricular leadership and evaluation strategies.""Assessment of global education policy issues in education. Analysis of policies, implementation strategies, and policy outcomes."Current issues and new directions in student affairs practice. Topics developed to the specific needs of student affairs professionals. Primarily for off-campus.Current issues and new directions in student affairs practice. Topics developed to the specific needs of student affairs professionals. Primarily for off-campus.Current issues and new directions in student affairs practice. Topics developed to the specific needs of student affairs professionals. Primarily for off-campus.Current issues and new directions in student affairs practice. Topics developed to the specific needs of student affairs professionals. Primarily for off-campus."Explores theories of equity, diversity, and inclusion to build knowledge and skills related to multicultural competence in student affairs practice.""An introduction to the field of student affairs practice with a consideration of student activities, counseling services, financial aid, admissions, student conduct, academic advising, and residential programs; includes community college programs.""Organization structures, role and function of student affairs staff; policies and decision-making for student affairs practice.""Theories of student development and their applications in student affairs programs, services, and activities are reviewed. Emphasis is placed on psychosocial, cognitive developmental, and learning theories as well as newer integrative theories."Study of the impact of the college environment on students and use of environmental theory to create positive learning situations for students."The relationship between college students and characteristics from 1950 to the present. Traditional assumptions about the impact of higher education on students will be reviewed and challenged. Campus issues and concerns relative to commuters and residential life. Participants will analyze institutional responses to students through college missions, organizational development, structure, core curriculum and retention.""Development of effective, basic counseling skills. Understanding of group dynamics. Ability to work effectively in groups."Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus.Current issues and new directions in community college education. Topics developed to the specific needs of   colleges. For off-campus."The community college as a unique social and educational institution: its history, philosophy, functions, programs, faculty and student characteristics, organization and finance, trends, and issues. Reviews current research and exemplary community college practices internationally, nationally, and in Iowa."Independent study on specific topics arranged with an instructor.Independent study on specific topics arranged with an instructor.Independent study on specific topics arranged with an instructor.Independent study on specific topics arranged with an instructor.Independent study on specific topics arranged with an instructor.Independent study on specific topics arranged with an instructor.Independent study on specific topics arranged with an instructor.Independent study on specific topics arranged with an instructor.Supervised on-the-job field experience."This course is designed to integrate the learning experiences of students completing the Master's Degree Program in higher education. Such issues as ethics, continuing professional development, career planning and leadership will be explored.""Administrative organization and behavior: communications, leadership, finance, strategic planning, and institutional governance.""Lectures, discussions, and individual investigation relating to financial administration in colleges and universities. Budgeting, auxiliary enterprises, administration of financial planning, fund raising, examination of theories on expenditures. Designed for persons aspiring to serve as college administrators."Examination of institutional culture and issues in higher education focusing on the roles and responsibilities of faculty and academic administrators."An examination of social identity theories including those exploring race, ethnicity, gender, class, ability, sexuality, and spirituality.  An exploration of how social identity is influenced by the dynamics of power and oppression in education and society and how to enhance the college experiences of students from diverse backgrounds."Introduction to the historical and contemporary landscape of schooling in the United States. Emphasis is placed on topics and tensions in the relationship between school and society (e.g. equity of access to education and competing purposes of education) and the implications of these topics and tensions for teaching and learning in public schools. Designed for students in a graduate licensure program.Introduction to Western philosophy of education. Emphasis is placed on enduring debates about the purposes(s) of education in a just society. Readings include classic and contemporary texts."Survey course in the history of education in the United States, from the colonial era to the present. Emphasis is placed on enduring debates about the purpose(s) of public schooling. Readings include primary and secondary materials.""Selected topics in history of education, philosophy of education, and comparative education."Seminar in History of Education.Advanced special topics."Introduction to the discipline of history and how historians think and work. Focus on research methodologies, writing and analytical practices of historians, and specialization in the discipline."Western civilization from ancient Mediterranean world to 1500. Social and cultural developments; economic and political ideas and institutions; problems of historical change and continuity.Western civilization from 1500 to present. Social and cultural developments; economic and political ideas and institutions; problems of historical change and continuity."Origins, development, decline and transformation of China from earliest times to present.""Colonial foundations: revolution, confederation, and constitution; nationalism and democracy; sectional disunity, Civil War, and reunion.""Industrialization; emergence as a great power; boom and depression; war, internationalism and Cold War; modern industrial society.""An interdisciplinary and chronological examination of Asian American immigration experiences from the early 19th century to the 21st century. Focus on how these immigration histories are accompanied by changing racial constructions. Discussion of racial stereotyping, the model minority myth, identity development, and efforts for social justice.""Historical and cultural heritage of Latinas/os in the United States. The histories of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, and other Latin American peoples in the U.S. emphasizing political and cultural convergence and congruencies."Ideas of nature from ancient Greece to the seventeenth-century scientific revolution.Science from seventeenth-century scientific revolution to Darwin and Einstein."Innovation across cultures from the ancient Ì¢‰âÂÅÒSeven Wonders of the WorldÌ¢‰âÂåù to the modern world, with developments in Egypt, Greece, Rome, the Islamic World, India, China, Europe, and the Americas. Topics include major inventions, agricultural technologies, architecture, manufacturing, warfare, engineering, printing, entertainment, transport, and communications.""Historical examination of art, literature, thought, and religious beliefs of major civilizations of the ancient Mediterranean countries until the end of the 8th century.""Social practices, beliefs and material traits of everyday life in America from the mid-19th century to the present. Includes literature, music, theater and other entertainments. Dime novels, vaudeville, rock and roll music, Hollywood and establishment of professional athletic leagues are among the cultural artifacts and phenomena considered.""Survey of political, social, and cultural developments in western Europe for the entire medieval period, 300-1500.""Survey of major themes in the social, political, cultural, and religious history of early modern Europe, including the eras of renaissance and reformation, the age of exploration, development of the modern individual and household, and enlightenment.""Southern Europe and North Africa, Classical Greece to the seventeenth century:  political, social and cultural developments, including economic growth, trade, and interaction of cultures, with focus on the rise and decline of early modern Mediterranean states.""Social, cultural, demographic, and economic experiences. Religious Reformation. Growth of the State (and Empire) and political institutions."Examination of material objects made and used by Asian Americans with both historical and contemporary focuses; transnational and interdisciplinary lenses to interpret the material world; contemporary approaches to analysis of artifacts.China from 1644 to 1912; internal and external stimuli on traditional structure leading to reform and revolution.China from 1912 to present; search for a new order and continuing Chinese revolution.Japan 1600 to the present; emphasis on transformation of feudal Japan into a post-industrial society.Colonial Latin America from European discovery and colonization to wars for independence.Modern Latin America national origins from 1800 to present."Examines African roots of black culture and the African American experience in the United States from the colonial period through the Civil War. Topics include Atlantic Slave Trade, slavery and American identity, abolition, the emergence of Black Nationalism, and black participation in the Civil War.""Explores African American political thought and political action from Reconstruction to the present. Topics include rise of Jim Crow segregation, urban migration, Garvey movement, Harlem Renaissance, Depression and world wars, Pan-Africanism, civil rights, Black Power, and black feminism.""Examination of the United States from the Constitutional Convention up to the Mexican War. Topics include the Washington, Jefferson, and Jackson administrations, the War of 1812, slavery and the South, economic and social development, Westward expansion and reform.""Examination of the social and economic contradictions that led to Civil War and the reconstruction of American freedom and democracy. Topics include the Mexican War, sectional conflict and the crisis of disunion, economic, political and social aspects of civil war, emancipation, and reconstruction.""America in transition and crisis: Progressivism, World War I, the twenties, the Great Depression, and World War II.""Modern American history with an emphasis on political, socio-cultural, ethno-racial, and military history.  Topics include the Cold War, the wars in Korea and Vietnam, civil rights and Black/ethnic Power, modern feminism, and the conservative movement.""North American agricultural development to 1865.  American Indian agricultural systems, European background and agricultural revolution, agriculture in the colonial era, early republic and antebellum period.  Topics include origins of modern crops, agriculture's role in the economy, politics, and settlement of the U.S., slavery, rural and frontier life, and mechanization."American agricultural development since 1865.  Post-Civil War adjustments; westward expansion; economic boom and bust; mechanization; Dust Bowl and environmental challenges; Great Depression and New Deal; changing rural life; scientific and technological advances; farm crisis and late twentieth century challenges."Thematic approach to the development of the American agricultural system through the topics of food and eating.  Changes in American food systems from Native American, pre-contact diets through modern innovations such as fast food, organics, and eating locally.""Survey of major social, cultural and economic developments in Iowa from the late 1700s.  Emphasis on minority groups, pioneer life, early economic development, industrial development, educational and religious development, and outstanding personalities.""Chronological and topical survey of the status of women and men, focusing on sex and gender issues in the Ancient Mediterranean world; study of constructs of the female and the feminine. Readings from ancient and modern sources.  Emphasis on ancient Greece, Rome, and Egypt.""History of women's relationship to the fields of science, technology, and medicine, as students and professionals, consumers, subjects and patients, family members, workers and citizens. Concentrates especially on 19th and 20th century United States, concluding with an examination of current issues of special interest to women in science, technology, and medicine.""A survey from the Age of Enlightenment to the end of the twentieth century of the relationship between science, technology, and public or popular culture in a comparative European context (including Russia and the former Soviet Union).""Introduction to the topography, history, archaeology, monuments, and art of Rome from the Regal period through late Antiquity; attention given to the culture of modern Italy, preparatory to study abroad in Rome.""Supervised on-site instruction in the history, archaeology, monuments, and art of Rome and environs from the 8th center BCE to the 5th century CE; attention given to the culture of modern Italy.""A survey of social, economic, and political aspects of women's role from colonial era to present; emphasis on employment, education, concepts of sexuality, and changing nature of the home.""American military experience from the Pequot War to Vietnam, including King Philip's War, the French & Indian Wars, the American Revolution, the War of 1812, the Mexican-American War, the Civil War, the Spanish-American War, World Wars I & II, and the Korean War.""Covers military history from the Napoleonic era through the mid- and late-19th century wars, the First and Second World Wars, and wars of national liberation and regional conflicts since 1945.""A study of US foreign relations during the twentieth century, including the rise to global power, the First World War, diplomacy during prosperity and depression, the Second World War, the Cold War, relations with Latin America, East and South Asia, and Africa, the search for markets, and the perceptions of American foreign policy held by the US, its allies and adversaries, and others."Specialized topics in history; topics vary each time offered.Specialized topics in history; topics vary each time offered.Specialized topics in history; topics vary each time offered.Specialized topics in history; topics vary each time offered."Ancient Greece from the Bronze Age to the Hellenistic period; evolution of the Greek polis and its   cultural contributions, with a particular emphasis on the writings of Herodotus and Thucydides."Ancient Rome from the Regal Period to the fall of the Western Empire; evolution of Roman institutions and Rome's cultural contributions studied through original sources."Examines major political, religious, and cultural transformations in Western Europe and the Mediterranean, 300-1000.  Major topics include the fall of Rome, rise of Christianity, Germanic kingdoms, and Carolingian empire.""Examines political, economic, religious, and cultural forms emerging in Europe, 1000-1300, that still characterize Western society to this day.  Major topics include the medieval agricultural revolution, English and French monarchies, crisis of church and state, and growth of the papacy and personal religion.""Examines major political, economic, religious, and intellectual crises that beset Europe, 1300-1500, paving the way for early modernity.  Major topics include Black Death, 100 Years War, papal schism, and origins of Renaissance and Reformation.""Renaissance; Protestantism and the Age of Catholic reform; social, cultural, and economic changes; global expansion; religious warfare.""A study of the development of key themes in European thought: nature, man, God, society, history, and creativity from Rousseau to Post-Modernism."From absolutism to revolution and the rise of modern democracy."An in-depth investigation of the French Revolution, its causes and consequences, beginning in the Ancien Regime and ending with the fall of Napoleon."Russia to 1850. Origins of Russian people; Byzantine influences; Mongol invasion; rise of Moscow; Westernization.Russia since 1850. Reform and revolution; transformation of society; USSR as a world power; recent changes."Political, social, and cultural history of Germany from the 19th century to the present.""Course examines different forms and ideas of criminality and the nature and development of law enforcement in England between 1550 and 1856. Significant issues will include the nature of criminal records and statistics, the legal system, the politics of the law and its links with social relations, policing, female crime, juvenile delinquency, organized crime, riots, ""social crime,"" and the treatment of crime in creative literary texts.""Explores the history of punishing criminals in England and shows how interdisciplinary perspectives, ideas, and practices of punishment are related to mentalities, and socio-economic change. Issues of significance examined: violence, civility, manners, madness, public punishment, execution, imprisonment, transportation, mercy, the rise of asylums, and penal reform.""Study of London's social, economic, cultural, political, and environmental history 1500-1800, using both quantitative and qualitative methods to examine contemporary and secondary sources. Course combines standard lecture and discussion format with one week of intensive study abroad for 4th hour of course credit."England since 1850. Parliamentary and constitutional development; social reform and economic change; imperial Britain; welfare state."Political, economic, and social development of Mexico and Central America in nineteenth and twentieth centuries.""Survey of rebellions, revolutionary movements, and social revolutions in the twentieth century, including Guatemalan, Cuban, Mexican, Chilean, and Nicaraguan cases.""Exploration, colonization, and development of political, economic, religious, and cultural institutions of North American colonies before 1754. Topics also include social history, emergence of African-American slavery, relations with American Indians.""Participants, ideas, and events leading to independence and the foundation of the United States, 1754 to 1789. Topics include political, military, social, cultural history, also issues of gender and race relations.""The development of both law and the legal system from colonial times to the present, highlighting their crucial role in aspects of American life such as marriage, family, employment, racial identification, and economic exchange. Topics will include important past legal disputes, the different levels of courts, the various actors in the legal process (e.g., police, prosecutors, prisoners, judges and juries), the relationship between the individuals and institutions that comprise the legal system.""The impact on American families from colonial times onward of agricultural change, industrialization, urbanization, and wars and depressions.""History of the Great Plains from prehistoric period.  Emphasis on agricultural and rural development, Native Americans, cattle ranching, land policy, agrarian reform movements and federal policy.""History of the American South from colonial period to present. Emphasis on economic, social, and political change in this rural region.""History of trans-Mississippi West from 1800 to present, concentrating on settlement and regional identity. Emphasis on the state, the environment, urbanization, agriculture, Native Americans, and minority communities.""History of rural America from the colonial period to the present. Emphasizes immigration, ethnicity, religion, social and cultural change, and agriculture in relation to rural settlement, institution building, demographic change, gender, class, and political and economic development.""Survey of the interactions of human communities with the North American environment. Focus on the period from presettlement to the present, with a particular concentration on natural resources, disease, settlement patterns, land use, and conservation policies.""Comparative history of the civil rights and ethnic power movements (African American, Chicano, American Indian, Puerto Rican, among others) in the U.S. from World War II to the present. Topics include institutional foundations, leadership, gender and racial dynamics, and the convergences and divergences of these differing ethnic struggles for rights.""Evolution of China's external relations from the antiquities to our own times; conceptions, practices, and relationships that characterized the inter-state relations of the so-called ""Chinese world order,"" interactions between ""Eastern"" and ""Western,"" and ""revolutionary"" and ""conventional"" modes of international behaviors.""Important events in China's Cold War involvement, connections between domestic and foreign affairs, factors and rationales in China's foreign policy making the relationship between China's Cold War experience and recent developments."Observation and participation in a variety of school settings after admission to the teacher preparation program. (S/F grading may be used in some offerings of some sections.).Supervised participation in a 5-12 school setting. Permission of History/Social Sciences coordinator required prior to  enrollment. 1/2 day of time needed. Clinical Supervision Level 3."History of medicine, sickness, and public health from ancient times to the twenty-first century in the US, Europe, and around the world. Topics include changing ideas of health and illness, development of doctors and hospitals, social and ethical issues in health care, and epidemics from cholera to AIDS.""Inventions, innovations, artifacts, and material culture in the United States, from homespun cloth and the Colt revolver, through the transcontinental railroad and Model T, to fast food and the iPhone."Reading and reports on problems selected in conference with each student.   No more than 6 credits of Hist 490 may be counted toward graduation with a major in History.  No credits of Hist 490 may count toward a minor in History.Variable topics seminar that focuses on historiographical and research skills and writing. Required of majors."Specialized topics in history, topics vary each time offered.""Specialized topics in history, topics vary each time offered.""Specialized topics in history, topics vary each time offered.""Specialized topics in history, topics vary each time offered.""Concurrent enrollment in 480A; Admission to teacher education and 30 credits in subject-matter field. Theories and processes of teaching and learning secondary history/social sciences. Emphasis on development and enactment of current methods, assessments, and curriculum materials for providing appropriate learning experiences."Readings in East Asian history. Topics vary each time offered.Readings in American history. Topics vary each time offered.Readings in American history. Topics vary each time offered.Readings in American history. Topics vary each time offered.Readings in American history. Topics vary each time offered.Readings in American history. Topics vary each time offered.Readings in American history. Topics vary each time offered.Readings in American history. Topics vary each time offered.Readings in European history.Readings in European history.Readings in European history.Readings in European history.Readings in Latin American history. Topics vary each time offered.Readings in modern Russian history. Topics vary each time offered."The history of technology with emphasis on the historical literature, differing interpretations of major problems, and problems identified for college-level teaching and for further scholarly research.""Study of evidence, theory, and methods.""Study of evidence, theory, and methods.""Study of evidence, theory, and methods.""Study of evidence, theory, and methods."Feminism as a movement and feminst theory from the early modern period to the present as it relates to the writing of women's history.  Analysis of intepretations of European and U.S. women's history from patriarchal and postmodernist perspectives.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered.Topics vary each time offered.Emphasis varies each time offered.Graduate student thesis research.Orientation to Iowa State University and to the University Honors Program.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Independent study on topics of an interdisciplinary nature. Intended primarily for freshmen and sophomores.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Independent study on topics of an interdisciplinary nature. Intended primarily for freshmen and sophomores.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Independent study on topics of an interdisciplinary nature. Intended primarily for freshmen and sophomores.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."For students serving as leaders of First-Year Honors Seminars, under faculty supervision. Development of teaching and leadership skills within the context of an Honors education experience.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Interdisciplinary seminars on topics to be announced in advance.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Interdisciplinary seminars on topics to be announced in advance.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Interdisciplinary seminars on topics to be announced in advance.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Interdisciplinary seminars on topics to be announced in advance.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Independent study on topics of an interdisciplinary nature. Intended primarily for juniors and seniors.Intended for first-year students and others new to the horticulture curriculum.  Introduction to professional and educational development within horticulture.  Focus is on university and career acclimation.  Assessed service-learning component."Introduction to developing intentional learners and worthy team members. Learning as the foundation of human enterprise; intellectual curiosity; ethics as a personal responsibility; everyday leadership; effective team and community interactions including team learning and the effects on individuals; and growth through understanding self, demonstrating ownership of own learning, and internalizing commitment to helping others. Intentional mental processing as a means of enhancing learning. Interconnectedness of the individual, the community, and the world."Focus on team and community. Application of fundamentals of human learning; evidence of development as a responsible learner; intentional mental processing as a habit of mind; planning and facilitating learning opportunities for others; responsibility of the individual to the community and the world; leading from within; holding self and others accountable for growth and development as learners and leaders."Growing plants in and around the home including requirements for growing house plants; plant propagation; designing and maintaining flower, fruit, and vegetable gardens; lawn, tree, and shrub maintenance.""Demonstration and activities that illustrate principles of growing plants for the home garden.  Topics include floral and landscape design, plant identification, propagation, selection, and management for indoor and outdoor gardens.""Introduces basic geometric design of fresh arrangements, corsages, and holiday arrangements.  Includes use of tools and supplies."Practical courses in the field of horticulture.   A maximum of 6 credits of Hort 193 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Practical courses in the field of horticulture.   A maximum of 6 credits of Hort 193 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Practical courses in the field of horticulture.   A maximum of 6 credits of Hort 193 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Practical courses in the field of horticulture.   A maximum of 6 credits of Hort 193 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Practical courses in the field of horticulture.   A maximum of 6 credits of Hort 193 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Practical courses in the field of horticulture.   A maximum of 6 credits of Hort 193 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Practical courses in the field of horticulture.   A maximum of 6 credits of Hort 193 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Practical courses in the field of horticulture.   A maximum of 6 credits of Hort 193 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation."Biological principles of growing horticultural crops including anatomy, reproduction, light, temperature, water, nutrition, and growth and development. Laboratory exercises emphasize environmental factors and permit detailed observation of plant growth.""Introduction to basic conversation and communication skills in Spanish, and cross-cultural skills for working with Spanish speakers in the Horticulture industry, emphasizing the use of vocabulary and expressions common in the workplace.""Identification of trees, shrubs, and woody vines. Factors influencing the horticultural use of woody plants.  Field trips outside of regular class time may be required.""A scientific introduction to viticulture (grape-growing) and enology (wine-making).  Topics include grape species and varieties, viticulture practices, fruit quality, geography, history, principles of fermentation and aging, wine classification, appreciation, evaluation, storage and service, regulations, wine as food.  No wine tasting."Introduction to computer and hand rendering techniques of landscape graphics.  Students will gain proficiency in plan view and elevation graphics.  Intensive studio and computer based instruction."Planning, developing, and implementing science-based educational programs in a garden setting. Through hands-on experiences students will learn about horticulture, learning theory, and the application of science principles as they pertain to educating youth.  Assessed service-learning component.""Core background and specialty topics in agricultural, and horticultural pesticide applicator certification. Students can select certification categories and have the opportunity to obtain pesticide applicator certification at the completion of the course. Commercial pesticide applicator certification is emphasized.""Principles of plant physiology relating to growth and development of horticultural plants including plant water relations, membrane transport, photosynthesis, photomorphogenesis, respiration, and phytohormones. Emphasis on plant's responses to environmental factors (temperature, water, and light) including cellular and whole-plant physiology under stressful environments.""Fundamental principles underlying sexual and asexual propagation of plants; practice in reproducing plants by use of seeds, cuttings, layering, grafting and budding and tissue culture.""Identification, botanical characteristics, origins, propagation, uses and general culture of herbaceous annual and perennial plants for Midwestern gardens and landscapes.""Principles and practices of hydroponic systems, crop production and culture, aquaponic systems, and new food crops for hydroponic systems will be discussed. Laboratories will focus on demonstration and participation in practices and procedures used in hydroponic food crop production.  Assessed service-learning component.""Operation and management of greenhouses and other controlled environment agriculture structures.  Methods of monitoring and manipulating environmental, cultural, and management factors such as light, temperature, fertility, substrate, etc., to maximize production efficiency.  Emphasis placed on the production of ornamental and food crops.  Greenhouse design and specification project required.  Field trips outside scheduled class time required.""Seed production, maturation, dormancy, vigor, deterioration, and related aspects of enhancement, conditioning, storage, and quality evaluation. Aspects of the seed industry and regulation of seed marketing."Cultivars of the most prevalent and economically important woody landscape plants will be taught.  The importance of cultivars to the nursery and landscaping professions and suggestions for their proper usage will be discussed."Principles and practices involved with establishment and maintenance of managed landscapes.  Laboratory work involves site evaluation, installation techniques, postplant care, and maintenance of established landscape plants.""Principles and practices of turfgrass propagation, establishment, and management. Specialized practices relative to professional lawn care, golf courses, athletic fields, highway roadsides, and seed and sod production. The biology and control of turfgrass pests."Those enrolled in the horticulture curriculum are required to take 351L in conjunction with 351 except by permission of the instructor."Effects of chemical, physical, and biological properties of soils on plant growth, with emphasis on nutritive elements, pH, organic matter maintenance, and rooting development."Laboratory exercises in soil testing that assess a soil's ability to support nutritive requirements for plant growth."An introduction to field production of fruit and vegetable crops and the theoretical and practical knowledge required for successfully producing them. Topics will include basic principles and practices of fruit and vegetable production, site selection, soil techniques, irrigation management, equipment and tools, integrated pest management, season extension strategies, postharvest handling and food safety, marketing, and basic business planning for fruit and vegetable enterprises. Additionally, this course will prepare students for HORT 461 and HORT 471, that are advanced level courses focusing on fruit and vegetable production.""Functional and aesthetic aspects of landscape planning as a basis for design decisions; emphasis on spatial design and plant selection. Includes site analysis, development process, and design principles.""Introduction to landscape design process.  Intensive studio-based projects implementing principles of landscape design, concept development, and graphic communication.   Not available as credit for L A majors.""A structured work experience for the student to gain insight into management operations associated with production and management of horticultural crops. A report of 10 or more pages describing the student's experience is required. One credit is given for each term the student is enrolled in the course.   A maximum of two credits may be used toward the horticultural sciences course requirements, and two additional credits may be used toward the 128 credits required for graduation."Students must register for this course before commencing each work period."Breeding methods used in the genetic improvement of self-pollinated, cross-pollinated and asexually reproducing agronomic and horticultural crops. Applications of biotechnology techniques in the development of improved cultivars.""Inquiry into ethical issues and environmental consequences of horticultural cropping systems, production practices and managed landscapes. Emphasis on systems that are resource efficient, environmentally sound, socially acceptable, and profitable."Principles and practices of greenhouse floriculture production. Emphasis is placed on production of foliage and containerized flowering species produced in greenhouses and other controlled environments. Field trips outside scheduled class time required.  Greenhouse scheduling and costs of production projects are required."Principles and practices of greenhouse production of ornamental crops for the spring garden market.  Emphasis placed on the production of several ornamental crops, along with the complete palate of spring garden crops.  Field trips outside scheduled class time required.""Nursery layout, design, and cultural practices important for growing and shipping field and container-grown nursery crops.  Overview of garden center design and retailing and marketing strategies.  Field trip(s) outside scheduled class time may be required.""Principles and practices of residential landscape construction. Encompasses business and project management, landscape estimating and overview of common landscape materials.  Laboratory work involves construction project management and installation.""In-depth presentation and discussion of skills and strategies needed to manage a horticultural enterprise.  Topics include motivating employees, managing meetings, conducting performance appraisals, dealing with conflict, and managing an increasingly diverse work force.""Turfgrass science including the study of (1) specific information on soil chemistry and soil modification as they relate to the development and maintenance of turfgrass areas, (2) specialized management practices used in athletic field care, professional lawn care, and golf course industries, and (3) construction methods for golf courses and sports fields."Identification and biology of important diseases and insect pests of turfgrasses. Development of integrated pest management programs in various turfgrass environments."Management techniques for today's specialized athletic fields. The horticultural and budgetary aspects of football, soccer, baseball, and softball fields will be presented. Field trips and laboratory exercises will develop a practical understanding of actual principles in field development, construction, and management.""Irrigation systems and principles for turf and landscape environments.  Topics include design, installation, equipment, management, and trouble shooting of irrigation systems for golf, athletic fields, residential lawns and landscapes.  Participation in practical exercises and local field trips to irrigation sites is required.""Principles and practices of small fruit, tree fruit, and nut culture and production. Morphology, physiology of growth and development, plant establishment, pest management, pruning, training, harvesting, storage, and marketing of commercial temperate fruit and nut crops. Emphasis on sustainable practices.  Participation in practical exercises and local field trips is required.""Participation in the management and operation of fruit and vegetable enterprises for local markets.  The class is responsible for the plans, records, and decision for planting, operating, harvesting, and marketing fruit and vegetables.""Participation in the management and operation of fruit and vegetable enterprises for local markets. Principles and practices of researching and developing a commercial business plan that will meet industry standards and that will be linked to the operations and production associated with the HORT 465 class.  Laboratory work includes development of a horticulture enterprise business plan, high tunnel site preparation and planting, development of summer crop portocols, seedling production for the summer crop (if applicable) and land preparation and planting of a portion of the summer crop.""Participation in the management and operation of fruit and vegetable enterprises for local markets. Principles and practices of harvesting and marketing high tunnel crops and the planting and growing of a variety of summer vegetables in the field.  Laboratory work includes all operation and production aspects involved with the day-to-day running of a horticultural enterprise.  The class will be responsible for crop selection and crop protocols for the fall high tunnel crop and seedling production for this crop (if applicable).  Additionally, the class will be responsible for all crop maintenance decisions and record keeping during the season.""Participation in the management and operation of fruit and vegetable enterprises for local markets. Principles and practices of researching and developing a commercial horticulture enterprise market plan that could be used by a startup business and that will be linked directly to the operations and production associated with the HORT 465 class.  Laboratory work includes completing the summer crop harvest, development of a horticulture marketing plan, high tunnel site preparation and planting, development of spring high tunnel crop protocols and all crop maintenance decisions and the record keeping for the fall high tunnel crop.""Principles of vegetable production with emphasis on sustainable production practices, market outlets, business aspects, and risk management. Topics will include crop classification and rotation; planting methods; crop climatic conditions, physiological growth & development; soil, water, and pest management; cover cropping; season extension strategies; harvest and postharvest management and marketing.  Course involves visits to growers fields to observe/experience their production enterprise."Hands-on training in the area of vegetable crop production.  Students will have an opportunity to grow a variety of vegetables in a heated greenhouse and also conduct greenhouse and lab experiments.  The lab also involves visits to vegetable production sites in Iowa to observe/experience and learn from growers and other agricultural professionals."Discussion of establishment and management of woody perennials in community-owned urban greenspaces, consideration of urban site and soil characteristics, plant physiology, plant culture, urban forest valuation, inventory methods, species selection, and urban forest maintenance (health care and pest management).""Limited to Landscape Design Installation and Management option students.  Development of residential landscapes using design principles and the design process.  Projects encompass site analysis, concept development, preliminary design, final design, and graphic presentation techniques.  Techniques will include hand and computer rendering."Understanding of the historical origins and ecological theories underpinning the practices involved in organic agriculture. Interdisciplinary examination of crop and livestock production and socio-economic processes and policies in organic agriculture from researcher and producer perspectives.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Investigation of topic holding special interest to the student. Comprehensive report required. Election of course and topic must be approved by department head.   A maximum of 4 credits of Hort 490 and an additional 2 credits of 490 from outside Horticulture may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.A professional work experience and creative project for seed science secondary majors. The project requires the prior approval and participation of the employer and instructor. The student must submit a written report.Off campus. Offered as demand warrants. Workshops in horticulture.Selected projects that result in outcomes benefiting a non-Iowa State University entity while instilling professional ethics and accomplishing student learning goals. Course expenses paid by student. A maximum of 4 credits of 494 may be used toward the Horticulture credits required for graduation. Assessed service-learning component.Selected projects that result in outcomes benefiting a non-Iowa State University entity while instilling professional ethics and accomplishing student learning goals. Course expenses paid by student. A maximum of 4 credits of 494 may be used toward the Horticulture credits required for graduation. Assessed service-learning component.Selected projects that result in outcomes benefiting a non-Iowa State University entity while instilling professional ethics and accomplishing student learning goals. Course expenses paid by student. A maximum of 4 credits of 494 may be used toward the Horticulture credits required for graduation. Assessed service-learning component."Limited enrollment. Students enrolled in this course also intend to register for HORT 496 the following term. Topics include preparation for safe international travel, the horticultural/agricultural industries, climate, crops, economics, geography, history, marketing, soils, culture, traditions, and horticultural/agricultural development of the country to be visited. Students enroll in this course the term immediately before travel to the foreign country.""Limited enrollment. Study and tour of production methods in major horticultural regions of the world. Influence of climate, economics, geography, soils, landscapes, markets, cultures, and history of horticultural crops. Location and duration of tours will vary. Tour expenses paid by students.""Introduction to genetics of reproductive systems, recombination, segregation and linkage analysis, inbreeding, quantitative inheritance, fertility regulation, and polyploidy to prepare students for subsequent courses in crop improvement. Enrollment is restricted to off-campus MS in Plant Breeding students.""Applications of Integrated Crop Management principles (including plant pathology, entomology, and horticulture) to tropical cropping systems. Familiarization with a variety of tropical agroecosystems and Costa Rican culture is followed by 10-day tour of Costa Rican agriculture during spring break, then writeup of individual projects.""Inquiry into ethical issues and environmental consequences of horticultural cropping systems, production practices and managed landscapes. Emphasis on systems that are resource efficient, environmentally sound, socially acceptable, and profitable."Instruction in scientific methods and communication skills.Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Techniques. Includes: fermentation, protein isolation, protein purification, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, NMR, confocal microscopy and laser microdissection, Immunophenotyping, and monoclonal antibody production. Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Brief introduction to plant physiology.  Physiological aspects of seed development, maturation, longevity, dormancy and germination.  Links between physiology and seed quality."Project-focused engagement in food and farming systems using tools and perspectives drawn from multiple disciplines. Includes a field component."Selected topics on anatomy, morphology, and physiology relative to growth and development of perennial grasses. Emphasis on growth and development characteristics peculiar to grasses and variations of such characteristics under natural and managed conditions."Identification and biology of important diseases and insect pests of turfgrasses. Development of integrated pest management programs in various turfgrass environments.Understanding of the historical origins and ecological theories underpinning the practices involved in organic agriculture. Interdisciplinary examination of crop and livestock production and socio-economic processes and policies in organic agriculture from researcher and producer perspectives."Workshops in horticulture, with emphasis on off-campus instruction.""Workshops in horticulture, with emphasis on off-campus instruction.""Workshops in horticulture, with emphasis on off-campus instruction.""Workshops in horticulture, with emphasis on off-campus instruction.""Workshops in horticulture, with emphasis on off-campus instruction.""Workshops in horticulture, with emphasis on off-campus instruction.""Workshops in horticulture, with emphasis on off-campus instruction.""Workshops in horticulture, with emphasis on off-campus instruction."Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Research seminars by faculty and graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Discussions are intended to foster the development of graduate students as teaching assistants and future horticulture/plant science teachers.  Topics include establishing a classroom presence, improving lectures, motivating students, dealing with difficult or disruptive students, and developing a teaching philosophy.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to the foodservice, lodging, and tourism components of the hospitality industry. Background information, current issues, and future challenges in various segments of the industry."Overview of management concepts and distinct features of university dining services."Introduction to Uniform Systems of Accounts for hospitality industry, profitability, income statements, budgeting, managing cash, accounts receivable and payable, costs control, pricing, and evaluation related to restaurant, lodging, and club industry. Preparation for a hospitality accounting certification exam.""Sanitation and safety principles in hospitality operations. Issues impacting consumers and operators. Characteristics of food, supplies, and equipment as related to quality, sanitation and safety.  Application of HACCP. Preparation for national foodservice sanitation certification examination.""Overview of the global tourism industry: hospitality and related services, destination/ attractions, tourist behaviors, and destination marketing.  Introduction to destination mix, socio-economic and cultural impacts of tourism, destination organizations, tourist motivations, destination image, marketing, promotions, tourism distribution system, and the future of tourism.""Organization and management of private clubs including city, country, and other recreational and social clubs. Field trip may be required."Laws relating to ownership and operation of hospitality organizations. The duties and rights of both hospitality business operators and customers.  Legal implications of various managerial decisions.Examination of current issues in the attractions and amusement park industry.  Emphasis will be placed on development and design along with the functional departments of modern amusement parks and themed attractions."Introduction to revenue and cost systems in the hospitality industry. Application of principles related to procurement, production, and inventory controls."Introduction to functional department activities and current issues of lodging organizations with emphasis on front office and housekeeping. Reservation activities and night audit exercises. Case studies."Principles of and procedures used in quantity food production management including menu planning, food costing, work methods, food production systems, quality control, and service."Application of quantity food production and service management principles and procedures in the program's foodservice operation."Introduction to history and methods of production for a variety of wines, beers, spirits, and other beverages.  Beverage tasting and sensory analysis; product knowledge; service techniques; sales; and alcohol service related to the hospitality industry."The application of the management principles and procedures related to the sale and service of alcohol and specialty beverages served in the beverage and hospitality industry.  Beverage tasting and sensory analysis of products commonly served in the beverage industry."Principles and techniques related to basic management, leadership, and human resource management of foodservices in health care and other on-site foodservice settings. Food safety and sanitation for on-site foodservice operations.   Credit for either HSP M 391 or AESHM 287 and AESHM 438 may count toward graduation. Not accepted for credit toward a major in Hospitality Management.""Introduction to cost control in foodservice departments: procedures for controlling food, labor, and other variable costs. Application of principles related to food product selection, specification, purchase, and storage in health care and other onsite operations.   Credit for either HSP M 392 or HSP M 233 and HSP M 333 may count toward graduation. Not accepted for credit toward a major in Hospitality Management.""Use of common financial statements, accounting ratios, and financial techniques to impact management decisions.""Introduction to hospitality information technology. Property management and point-of-sales system interfaces:  customer relationship management, selecting and purchasing computer systems, electronic distribution systems, internet and its related application systems, managing internal and external communication networks. Case studies."Emphasis on development of management personnel in hospitality organizations. Case studies."Development of business plan and evaluation of business performance in a simulated environment. Operational decision making practices by applying concepts of management, operations, marketing, and finance for a computer-mediated environment.""Introduction to  strategic management principles and practices with an application of human resources, operations, marketing, and financial management concepts. Case studies."Exploration of the historical and cultural development of the world food table.  Creative experiences with U.S. regional and international foods. Application of management and financial principles in food preparation and service in fine dining settings. Individual special problems.Capstone seminar for the food safety minor. Case discussions and independent projects about safety issues in the food system from a multidisciplinary perspective.Independent Study in Hospitality Management.Focus on teaching and research scholarship involving the hospitality industry.Focus on current issues related to the hospitality industry.Concepts of financial management applied to strategic decision making.Theories of human resources management. Practices and principles related to development of management personnel."Application of marketing principles in developing effective marketing strategies for hospitality, apparel, and retail organizations. Evaluation of multi-dimensional marketing functions in hospitality organizations.""Strategic management process as a planning and decision-making framework; integration of human resources, operations, marketing, and financial management concepts."Exploration of the historical and cultural development of the world food table.  Creative experiences with U.S. regional and international foods. Application of management and financial principles in food preparation and service in fine dining settings. Individual special problems.Topics in hospitality management.Special topics in tourism.Creative component as arranged with instructor."Development of professional written communication with emphasis on abstracts, proposals, manuscripts, and technical reports."Advanced administrative problems; case studies in foodservice and lodging organizations.Theories and research in financial management with emphasis on financial performance and financing decisions.Research in human resources management with an emphasis on organization or unit administration.Conceptual and theoretical development of marketing strategies. Analytical and critical review of marketing research and industry practices.Analysis and applications of concepts and theories of operations research for lodging operations."Analysis and application of theories, research, and research methods in foodservice operations."Advanced study of current topics in hospitality management.Advanced study of current topics in hospitality management.Advanced study of current topics in hospitality management.Advanced study of current topics in hospitality management.Advanced study of current topics in hospitality management.Advanced study of current topics in hospitality management.Research."Principles and procedures to plan, design, and conduct effective evaluation studies (formative, summative, usability) in different settings are studied. Opportunities to engage in real or simulated evaluation projects of substantial scope are provided. Create evaluation instruments, develop methods with which to evaluate a product or program, conduct try-outs or usability sessions, analyze the data, report the findings, and recommendations are some of the course activities.""Introduction to computational techniques involving human language and speech in applications such as information retrieval and extraction, automatic text categorization, word prediction, intelligent Web searching, spelling and grammar checking, speech recognition and synthesis, statistical machine translation, n-grams, POS-tagging, word-sense disambiguation, on-line lexicons and thesauri, markup languages, corpus analysis, and Python programming language."Concepts and practices for analysis of English by computer with emphasis on the applications of computational analysis to problems   in applied linguistics such as corpus analysis and recognition of learner language in computer-assisted learning and language   assessment."Biological, behavioral, perceptual, cognitive and social issues relevant to human computer interactions.""Basics of hypothesis testing, experimental design, analysis and interpretation of data, and the ethical principles of human research as they apply to research in human computer interaction.""Optimization involves finding the 'best' according to specified criteria. Review of a range of optimization methods from traditional nonlinear to modern evolutionary methods such as Genetic algorithms. Examination of how these methods can be used to solve a wide variety of design problems across disciplines, including mechanical systems design, biomedical device design, biomedical imaging, and interaction with digital medical data. Students will gain knowledge of numerical optimization algorithms and sufficient understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of these algorithms to apply them appropriately in engineering design. Experience includes code writing and off-the-shelf routines. Numerous case-studies of real-world situations in which problems were modeled and solved using advanced optimization techniques.""Introduction to visualizing scientific information with 3D computer graphics and their foundation in human perception. Overview of different visualization techniques and examples of 3D visualization projects from different disciplines (natural sciences, medicine, and engineering). Class project in interactive 3D visualization using the ParaView, Mayavi, TVTK, VTK or a similar system.""Practical introduction to User Experience (UX) tools and how to use them for research: Designing a UX study; developing meaningful user tasks; how to plan a research study that integrates eyetracking measures, UX measures, behavioral measures, surveys, interviews and IRB applications; analyzing UX data; and presenting UX study results.""Fundamental technologies enabling augmented reality (AR) application development. Assessment and integration of the hardware and software systems necessary for AR including, tracking, image processing and rendering. Programming skills in C++ and GPU-based optimization are developed to enable evaluation of interaction devices and modalities afforded by AR.""A discourse on interactive game design concepts through the rapid prototyping of video games. Topics discussed include interdisciplinary views on fundamentals of game play, emergence, emotional affect, behavioral learning, player progression, optimal experience and others.  Discussions on interactivity as an art form and its implications to various fields of human computer interaction.""Fundamental concepts of software programming and the practical use of the Python programming language. Assignments include user interaction and interface design, information visualization, as well as other computational HCI tools. Intended for graduate students without prior background in software development. Requires programming during class lectures.""This class covers statistical and algorithmic methods for sensing, recognizing, and interpreting   the activities of people by a computer. This semester we will focus on machine perception   techniques that facilitate and augment human-computer interaction. The main goal of the class is to   introduce computational perception on both theoretical and practical levels. Participation in small   groups to design, implement, and evaluate a prototype of a human-computer interaction system that   uses one or more of the techniques covered in the lectures.""A systematic introduction to the underpinnings of Virtual Environments (VE), Virtual Worlds, advanced displays and immersive technologies; and an overview of some of the applications areas particularly virtual engineering.""An introduction to the emerging interdisciplinary field of Developmental Robotics, which crosses the boundaries between robotics, artificial intelligence, developmental psychology, and philosophy. The main goal of this field is to create autonomous robots that are more intelligent, more adaptable, and more useful than the robots of today, which can only function in very limited domains and situations.""Issues in ethics and decision-making as they relate to technology, design, design research, HCI, and the design industry."Investigation of problems of special interest in human computer interaction."Students will be taken step-by-step through activities that must be undertaken when attempting to commercialize a technology or start their own company.  Speakers will be brought in to introduce relevant topics, provide resources, answer questions, and provide working examples.""Building, managing, and using collaborative technologies. Collaborative uses of social media such as blogs, wikis, picture and video sharing, social networks, Second Life, and other new media.  Exposure to concepts and hands on use and management of several collaborative technologies.""Human interaction design as it applies to HCI. Aspects of audience analysis, design methodologies for creating concepts and solutions, techniques of concept prototyping, and the fundamentals of visual design such as color, type, symbolism, and grid structure. Class discussions, tutorials, and hands-on projects.""Usability evaluation with emphasis on requirements gathering, rapid prototyping, evaluation, and communicating results through report writing along with emerging practices.""Use of principles of visual design such as color, typography, photography, graphs, charts, and layout to create effective poster and power point presentations. Experience with design software, create posters and presentations from their own data, and evaluate design solutions  with regard to their visual and verbal communication. Principles of design and communication theory will be introduced.""Capstone course in HCI. Through a significant design project, students demonstrate their mastery of core courses in HCI. This course is the final course for students in the HCI Online MS program."Creative component for nonthesis option of Master of Science degree.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Exploration of advanced aspects of the instructional design process.  Application of analysis,   design, development and production, evaluation, implementation, and project management principles.    Focus on the production and use of instructional technology with an emphasis on the instructional   design consulting process.  Theory and research in instructional technology provides the foundation   for design decisions.""Examine opportunities and implications of information technologies and human computer interaction on social and organizational systems. Explore ethical and social issues appurtenant to human computer interaction, both from a proscriptive and prescriptive perspective. Develop informed perspective on human computer interaction. Implications on research and development programs.""Provides an overview of human cognitive capabilities and limitations in the design of products, work places, and large systems. Contexts vary broadly and could range from simple use of mobile devices to an air-traffic control or nuclear plant command center. Course focuses on what we can infer about users' thoughts and feelings based on what we can measure about their performance and physiological state. Covers the challenge of designing automated systems.""Overview of life-span developmental tasks (physical, cognitive, language, social, emotional) examined from various theoretical perspectives. Discussion of topics related to family diversity, individual/family health and well-being and reciprocal relationships as affected by external factors.""Introduction to professional principles and ethics, understanding of child abuse reporting, universal precautions. Completion of criminal background checks for ISU practica.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Only one of HD FS 103 or 105 may count toward graduation.""Introduction to professional principles and ethics, understanding of child, dependent adults and elder abuse reporting, working with aging adults, universal precautions.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Only one of HD FS 103 or 105 may count toward graduation.""Introduction to the Department of Human Development and Family Studies including academic requirements and opportunities, strategies for transitioning to college, learning and study strategies, reading and reflection, and career awareness.""Introduction to HD FS curricula and faculty for students in CH FS, FCEDS or F C P. Department and University policies and procedures, degree audits, and registration.  Exploration of campus resources and strategies for student success.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to basic concepts and budgeting practices for management of resources and prevention of financial problems commonly associated with college, including credit and student loans.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Overview of early childhood education (birth-grade 3) teacher licensure requirements.  Program planning and university procedures.  Required of all students majoring in early childhood education.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Ethics, professional development, and career exploration in child, adult and family services. Visits to and service learning with programs that serve children, adults and families with diverse needs. Participation in service learning project required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Typical and atypical development of children prenatal through middle childhood. Examination of healthy development and potential impact of health issues in children. Discussion of influence of the family and society on development."Learning, growth, and development (typical and atypical) of children from birth through age eight. Explores importance of family, programs, and a diverse society. Strategies for observing, recording, and interpreting children's cognitive, communication, motor, social, and emotional development. Practicum.""Typical and atypical development from 5 to 12 years of age. Development in the contexts of family, school, and society. Guidance of children in family and group settings.""Physical, cognitive, and socioemotional development of adolescents and young adults in the context of family, relationships, and culture.""Introductory exploration of the health, individual and social factors associated with adult development including young adulthood, middle age and older adulthood. Information is presented from a life-span developmental framework.""Introduction to factors affecting consumer and housing decisions of individuals and families, including housing issues such as housing quality, accessibility and affordability, neighborhood/housing contexts for families; and consumer issues such as consumer protection, legislation and regulation, and consumer fraud.""Evaluation of literature for children, including an emphasis on diversity and inclusion; cultural competence. Roles of literature in the overall development of children. Literature selection and use in the home and educational settings.""Parenting practices and family relationships across the lifespan. Practical knowledge and techniques about how to be an effective parent. Diverse families, discipline, and parent education programs.""Family communication and its functions to develop, maintain, enrich and limit family relationships. Family theories related to communication and ethical considerations when working with families.""Behavioral, biological, and psychological aspects of human sexuality within the social context of family, culture, and society. Role of sexuality in human development. Critical analysis of media and research. Communication and decision-making skills relating to sexuality issues and relationships.""Introduction to basic principles of personal and family finance. Budgeting, record keeping, checking and savings accounts, consumer credit, insurance, investments, and taxes."Consult department office for procedure. Supervised field experience in human development and family studies programs.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Consult department office for procedure. Supervised field experience in human development and family studies programs.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Consult department office for procedure. Supervised field experience in human development and family studies programs.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Assessment strategies for infants and toddlers, including those with special needs. Curricula, learning environments, teaching strategies, health and nutritional practices, and schedules that are developmentally, individually, and culturally appropriate. Using assessment to plan, implement, and evaluate activities to promote physical, motor, cognitive, communication, and social emotional development; practicum.""The social, economic, and governmental contexts of financial decision-making at the household level.""Guiding prosocial development, self-regulation, and task engagement of children birth to age 8. Focus is on promoting prosocial behaviors through supportive relationships and environments within diverse home, center, or school settings. Functional behavior assessment and ongoing progress monitoring for targeted and intensive interventions. Practicum.""Assessment strategies for preschool and kindergarten children, including those with special needs. Learning environments, schedules, activities, nutritional practices, and teaching strategies that are developmentally, individually, and culturally appropriate. Using assessment to plan, implement, and evaluate activities to promote physical motor, cognitive, communication, and social emotional development; practicum.""Programming in inclusive child care centers and family child care homes, including those with special needs, aged birth through 8 years. Developing, implementing, and evaluating learning environments; activities and materials; behavioral guidance and classroom management practices; health and nutritional practices; and schedules to ensure developmental, individual, and cultural appropriateness. Monitoring children's development and behavior to promote physical, motor, cognitive, communication, and social emotional development. Learning to collaborate effectively with parents and staff. Practicum.""Adapting instruction, materials, and equipment to meet developmental needs of young children birth through age 8 with diverse learning needs and multiple disabilities in inclusive settings. Addressing individualized education programs; special health care needs, challenging behavior, and positioning and handling techniques.""Approaches to and assessment of housing and services that assist those with special needs including those with disabilities, low-income, children at risk, single-parents, and the homeless. Emphasis on community settings; e.g., residential facilities, group housing, shelters and transitional housing.""Causes and consequences of family stressors including physical, sexual, and emotional abuse; substance abuse; and mental and physical illness across the life span. Interplay between victims, offenders, and the treatment system."Understanding and evaluating research. Use of primary and secondary data to identify and study problems related to human development and family issues. An introduction to statistical concepts and data analysis. Computer laboratory experience.Consideration of death in the life span of the individual and the family with opportunity for exploration of personal and societal attitudes."Interchanges of the aged and their families. Emphasis on role changes, social interaction, and independence as influenced by health, finances, life styles, and community development.""Economic well-being in the context of demographic change, the present and future of Social Security, family retirement needs analysis, investment strategies and characteristics of retirement plans, helping others to work towards financial security, family economic issues for retired persons. Overview of employee and retirement benefits.""Fundamental principles of the financial planning process, client/planner interactions, time value of money applications as well as analyses of ethics review, financial statements, cash flow and debt management, education planning, retirement planning, tax planning, and estate planning needs of families."Public policy and politics as they affect children and families. Examination of how individuals and groups influence policy. Investigation of current issues and programs influencing the well-being and welfare of children and families.Intensive study of a selected topic in human development and family studies.Teaching experience with preschool children with disabilities.Discussion of professional practice experience.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Discussion of HD FS 417 student teaching field experience.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Process and development of skills necessary for professional preparation and practice including career planning, resume writing, and interviewing. Strategies for successful career management.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Theory and practice of program evaluation and proposal writing in human services including needs assessment, outcome development and measurement, and proposal components.   Assessment of programs' success in meeting goals.""Program models and methods leading to development and organization of appropriate curricula in preschool and kindergarten programs for young children with diverse learning needs. Government regulations and professional standards for child programming. Teaming with parents, colleagues, and paraprofessionals to plan, implement, and evaluate developmentally and culturally appropriate individualized education plans in inclusive settings; practicum.""Family systems and the application of family centered principles in early intervention. Understanding the impact of disability on families and young children. Utilizing strategies for delivering family-centered interventions and service coordination in home-based and natural environments. Teaming with families and interdisciplinary colleagues to create, implement, and evaluate Individualized Family Service Plans (IFSPs). Understanding foundations of theory and policy and empowering families through effective supports and services. Experiences with families.""Emphasis on independent living within residential settings including specialized shelter, supportive services and housing management. Application of criteria appropriate for accessibility and functional performance of activities; universal design principles. Creative project provides service learning opportunities. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Analysis of research related to family interaction processes across the family life span. Emphasis on relationship dynamics and cultural differences."Management of family financial resources; emphasis on savings and the investment planning process; issues facing financial planners who manage family assets. Identification of investment options including common stocks, fixed income securities, convertible securities, and related choices.""Study of estate planning focusing on efficient conservation and transfer of wealth, consistent with clientÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s goals.  Legal, tax, financial and non-financial aspects of estate planning process; trusts, wills, probate, advanced directives, charitable giving, wealth transfers and related taxes."Development and refinement of competencies required by personal financial planners to work with individuals and families in meeting financial objectives. Utilization of skills obtained in financial planning emphasis to complete one or more financial planning narratives."Examination of purpose, policies, staffing, operations, and clientele of organizations serving children, adults and families with diverse needs.  Management/leadership principles and techniques, including an introduction to financial management involved. Administrators/supervisors role in staff hiring, supervision, evaluation and development, as well as program evaluation, goal setting, strategic planning, and advocacy will be explored.,.""Personal, social/psychological and legal climates affecting family financial decisions. A life cycle approach to financial decision making. Development of financial counseling and planning skills to assist families and individuals to become self-sufficient in family financial management.""Practical experience in remedial, preventative, and productive approaches to both financial and housing counseling in one-on-one and/or group settings."Consult department office for procedure.Consult department office for procedure.Supervised work experience related to the student's curriculum.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Workshop in HD FS.Supervised research experience."Overview of graduate study, research, ethics, and professional development in the field of human development and family studies. Curriculum, programs of study, portfolios, faculty research interests,  dissemination of research, career planning, and teaching discussed.""Concepts, methods, and strategies for research in human development and family studies. Topics include the nature of scientific research, measurement, types of research in human development and family studies, validity of research designs, methods of data gathering, and strategies for and issues in the study of change.""Introduction to qualitative research methodology. Application of fieldwork methods, analysis, interpretation, and writing through individual qualitative research projects.""Practical applications of data creation and manipulation, analysis, descriptive statistics through multivariate linear regression.""Theoretical approaches and current research in child, adolescent, and adult development. Individual life span perspectives. Implications for research, policy and practice. (Summer course offering is on-line).""Theoretical approaches and current research in family development. Review the nature and value of theory to the study of the family and evaluate the use of theory in empirical research. Implications for research, policy and practice.""Overview of current aging issues including theory and research, critical social and political issues in aging, the interdisciplinary focus of gerontology, career opportunities, and aging in the future. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Exploration of the biological, psychological and social factors associated with aging. Although the focus is on the later years, information is presented from a life-span developmental framework. Empirical studies are reviewed and their strengths, limitations and implications for normative and optimal functioning are discussed. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Theories, research, and current issues regarding the intersection of development and disabilities. Investigation of interventions with individuals and families. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""The role of housing and real estate in the family financial planning process, including taxation, mortgages, financial calculations, legal concerns, and ethical issues related to home ownership and real estate investments. Emphasis on emerging issues in the context of housing and real estate. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Policy development in the context of the economic status of the older adult population. Retirement planning and the retirement decisions; social security and public transfer programs; intra-family transfers to/from the aged; private pensions; financing medical care; prospects and issues for the future."Analysis of contemporary and historical early childhood/early intervention/early childhood special education model programs and services. Examination of relationships among service systems and implementation, program quality, teacher effectiveness, and outcomes for children with and without disabilities. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Emphasis on independent living within residential settings including specialized shelter, supportive services and housing management. Application of criteria appropriate for accessibility and functional performance of activities; universal design principles. Creative project provides service learning opportunities. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Explores current, enduring, and some controversial family policies and programs. Examines the effect of public policies on families and children, especially those at risk. Describes work roles in family policy and the interaction of family researchers and policymakers.""Explores research related to family stress within romantic, parent-child, and sibling relationships. Examines contemporary theory and research on the nature, causes, and consequences of family stressors. These stressors include, but are not limited to economic distress; physical and emotional abuse; substance abuse; and mental and physical illness across the life span. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Use of interviews, observational assessments, direct tests with individuals and families for research and intervention. Opportunities to practice assessments.""Current research supporting cultural influences on the development of children, youth, and family life in the United States and internationally. Students will reflect upon their own culture and the child rearing practices, family roles, values, and traditions in different cultures. Discussion of the impact on human rights and social justice of particular practices. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Theories and research related to personal and family adjustments in later life affecting older persons and their intergenerational relationships. Related issues including demographics also are examined through the use of current literature. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Review of current research to provide a theoretical and practical understanding of the economic, social, and psychological factors that influence interpersonal relationships and individual well-being within the institution of the family system. Economic and policy effects considered.(on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Limited enrollment. Supervised international study experiences in Human Development and Family Studies. Countries vary.Limited enrollment. Supervised international study experiences in Human Development and Family Studies. Countries vary.Limited enrollment. Supervised international study experiences in Human Development and Family Studies. Countries vary.Limited enrollment. Supervised international study experiences in Human Development and Family Studies. Countries vary.Evaluation of investment markets for the household. Analysis of how families choose where to put their savings. Emphasis is on using the family's overall financial and economic goals to help inform investment choices. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Overview of program evaluation, research methods, and grant writing in gerontology. Includes application of quantitative and qualitative methods in professional settings. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Theoretical and practical issues related to design and implementation of program evaluation in social sciences. Includes theory, design, implementation, analysis and report writing to assist programs to be successful in meeting program goals.""Analysis of family income, wealth, and economic well-being. Emphasis on effects of family behavior and public policies on the adequacy and security of income across the family life cycle. Implications of resource allocation within the family for adult and child well-being.""Personal, social/psychological and legal climates affecting family financial decisions. A life cycle approach to financial decision making. Development of financial counseling and planning skills to assist families and individuals to become self-sufficient in family financial management.""Practical experience in remedial, preventative, and productive approaches to both financial and housing counseling in one-on-one and/or group settings."Consult department office on procedure for filing a written plan of study.Consult department office on procedure for filing a written plan of study.Supervised experience in an area of human development and family studies.Supervised experience in an area of human development and family studies.Workshop in HD FS."An integrative experience for gerontology students designed to be taken near the end of the degree program. By applying knowledge gained in earlier coursework, students will strengthen skills in ethical decision-making behavior, applying these skills in gerontology-related areas such as advocacy, professionalism, family and workplace issues. Students from a variety of professions will bring their unique perspectives to bear on topics of common interest. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Nonthesis students creative component (e.g., a special report, capstone course, integrated field experience, annotated bibliography, research project, design, or other creative endeavor). A minimum of five credits of independent work is required on the programs of study (POS). Creative component format determined cooperation with the POS committee.""Methodological and analytical issues in research in human development and family studies. Advanced research design and measurement, selection of statistical techniques, and issues in the interpretation of findings.""Research methodologies including phenomenology, grounded theory, ethnography, and case studies.  Methods of data collection and analysis procedures. Issues of ethics and interpretation of findings. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Rationale for and interpretation of random coefficient models. Strategies for the analysis of multi-level and panel data including models for random intercepts, random slopes, and growth curves.""Rationale for and interpretation of advanced structural equation modeling for the analysis of longitudinal data. Emphasis will be placed on developing a working familiarity with some of the common statistical procedures, coupled with their application through the use of statistical software.""Foundations of mixed methods research, controversies, and philosophical concerns. Rationale for and interpretation of mixed methods designs. Research design, sampling, data collection, data analysis, results, and interpretation. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Understand how to identify funding sources as well as the fundamental components of a federal research grant proposal such as the abstract or summary, background and significance, specific aims/goals and objectives, project design and methods, sustainability, assessment, broader impacts, dissemination, budget, budget justification, and cover letter."May be repeated. F.S.SS."Young childrenÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s cognitive, physical, communication, and social-emotional health and development will be examined. Both typical and atypical trajectories will be explored. Research on current trends in the field will be emphasized.(on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Issues related to special learning needs of children ages 3-8.  Design and implementation of group and individual intervention strategies including Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports. Discussion of coaching strategies to improve intervention implementation.(on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Examination of the individual, interpersonal, and familial factors that influence infant (birth through age 3) mental health. Analysis of the risk and protective factors that influence these systems and their potential effects on social-emotional development. Current issues relating to effective programs for improving parent-infant interactions and additional supports available to families.(on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Theory and research on biopsychosocial, cognitive, physical and sexual health and development from early adolescence to emerging adulthood. Contexts of development including families, peers, schools, neighborhoods, romantic relationships, economics and public policies are considered.(on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Review of the impact of the growing older adult population as well as individual development and aging on individuals, families, and society. Exploration of theoretical perspectives applied to adult development and aging and distinction of normative and non-normative changes in adulthood. Discussion of methods to assess development across adulthood and consideration of the role of individual and environmental factors impacting efforts to optimize adult development.(on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Research on the biological underpinnings of human development and the biobehavioral health of the family. Exposure to interdisciplinary research and practice on biomarkers in the family, with particular emphasis on health-and well being-related measures. Application of biomarker collection, measurement, analysis and dissemination."Supervised practice and experience in the following specified areas:.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised practice and experience in the following specified areas:.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised practice and experience in the following specified areas:.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised practice and experience in the following specified areas:.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Orientation and adjustment to the university and college; policies and procedures; academic resources; and development of a long-term curriculum plan. Comprehensive approach to career development; intensive self-analysis; and in-depth examination of majors in Human Sciences. Required for all students declared as Open Option in the College of Human Sciences.An exploration of diversity within the context of the Iowa State University community through understanding human relations issues."Leadership strategies and effective use of leadership skills in an international setting.  Compare leadership theories and practices in the U.S. and foreign countries.  Construct individual leadership strategies to deal with complex issues in a global environment.  Use discussion, personal assessment inventories, and simulated experiences to evaluate leadership strategies.  Develop and improve skills in meeting the challenges of teamwork.  Learn about the culture of a foreign country.""Leadership strategies and effective use of leadership skills in an international setting.  Compare leadership theories and practices in the U.S. and foreign countries.  Construct individual leadership strategies to deal with complex issues in a global environment.  Use discussion, personal assessment inventories, and simulated experiences to evaluate leadership strategies.  Develop and improve skills in meeting the challenges of teamwork.  Learn about the culture of a foreign country."Lectures provided by off-campus experts. Students are required to participate in discussion sessions with lecturers.Student and faculty presentation."Discuss and define similarities and differences of varied host responses to infectious challenge. Learning will focus on comparative aspects of the host response and the unique aspects of immunity from different organisms, while highlighting molecular and mechanistic similarities of pathogen recognition, response and resolution."Advanced study of specific topics in specialized field of immunobiology.Graduate research projects performed under the supervision of selected faculty members in the Interdepartmental Immunobiology major.Product scale form development and visual communication.Principles of structure and function in products."The history, definition, scope, and basic principles of industrial design. Overview of technical, artistic, and sociological context of the profession.""Exploration of strategies, methods, and processes associated with creative thinking skills and problem solving. Discussion of the nature of creativity and its implications in different contexts that cross content boundaries."Systematic design methodology and integration of creative thinking techniques.Exploration of commercial factors in industrial design."Survey of qualitative and quantitative methods with an emphasis on contextual user-centered research. Integration of user data collection, visualization, and synthesis as a source for design. Experience of a small-scale research practice related to industrial design."Introduction to materials and manufacturing methods for mass production and distribution of products.Emphasis on the computer as an industrial design and visualization tool."Theory and application of human factors issues in the industrial design field, specifically their impact on the relationship of the user, the product, and the product systems.""Historical perspective of industrial objects starting at the Industrial Revolution 1830 to 1960. Discussion of social, political, cultural and technological context for industrial design.""Historical perspective of industrial objects 1960 to present. Discussion of social, political, cultural and technological context for industrial design.""Professional industrial design, off-campus experience."Advanced topics focused on industrial design applications. Topics vary each time offered."Advanced topics focused on industrial design applications. Topics vary each time offered.   A. Theory, Criticism, Methodology B. Experimental Techniques C. Three Dimensional Design D. Distributed Collaboration."Advanced topics focused on industrial design applications. Topics vary each time offered.Advanced topics focused on industrial design applications. Topics vary each time offered.Advanced topics focused on industrial design applications. Topics vary each time offered.Advanced topics focused on industrial design applications. Topics vary each time offered."International study abroad program. Visits to design studios, showrooms, museums and manufacturing facilities."Advanced practice in specialized area of industrial design. Topics vary."Basic concepts and techniques for industrial design. Emphasis on form development, structure, function and communication.""Advanced concepts and techniques for industrial design. Emphasis on systematic design methodology and commercial factors, and visual and verbal communication of design problems and solutions.""Advanced, project-based application of industrial design concepts and techniques.""Advanced, project based application of industrial design concepts and techniques, with an emphasis on service and system design, and its implications for the community."Studio project focused on topics generated with external partners. Topics vary.Presentation and discussion of creative activity carried out in various design disciplines and their relationship to industrial design. Seminar sessions focusing on exemplary pieces of design research undertaken by faculty and graduate students in the design field."Exploration of problem-solving methods for systems, products, and processes across all contexts. Strategies for problem-solution co-evolution process, with a focus on collaborative and interdisciplinary design to investigate real-world problems and opportunities."Introduction to materials and manufacturing methods for products. Exploration of emerging materials and new applications.Exploration of multiple visual communication techniques used in industrial design and product development.Exploration of the computer as an industrial design and visualization tool. Advanced concepts in computer to machine interface for manufacture.Discussion of industrial design practice and career planning. Development and preparation of personal promotional materials for a range of media."Human factors issues and the study of relationships between the user, the product, and the human body and its physical functions. Investigations of bio-mechanics, anthropometry, instrumental displays and control, and their measurement as they relate to the design process.""Advanced topics focused on industrial design applications. Topics include theory, criticism, methodology, experimental techniques, three dimensional design, distributed collaboration.""Planned projects in topics related to theory, criticism, methodology, experimental techniques, three dimensional design, distributed collaboration.""International study abroad program. Visits to design studios, showrooms, museums and manufacturing facilities.""Professional industrial design, off-campus experience."Advanced creative component in specialized area of focus within industrial design. Culminates in a development plan and supporting documentary.Advanced creative component in specialized area of focus within industrial design. Culminates in a physical or digital artifact and supporting documentation."Cross-disciplinary research methods to examine the impact of industrial design on humans, environments, and social contexts. Examination and critique of current research methods employed in the field, and application of a selection of these methods to a variety of research questions.""Exploration and formulation of graduate thesis or project topics, with proposed studies and investigations. Introduction to structuring a design research prospectus and university requirements for graduation. Determine Faculty Committee and Program of Study and file forms with Graduate College."Advanced research component in specialized area of focus within industrial design. Culminates in a thesis document."(1-0) Introduce students to the industrial engineering profession, its scope, industrial engineering tools, and future trends."Development of information solutions for engineering problems. Fundamentals of the software development process. Engineering computations and the human/computer interface. Data models and database development. Program connectivity and network applications."Study of system improvement methods and strategies. Specific areas of lean system improvements include continuous improvement, setup reduction, workplace organization, inventory and waste minimization. Methods and strategies to analyze and quantify the impact of changes.""Introduction to metrology, engineering drawings and specifications.  Engineering methods for designing and improving systems. Theory, applications, and quality issues related to machining processes.""Basic concepts of ergonomics and work design. Their impact on worker and work place productivity, and cost. Investigations of work physiology, biomechanics, anthropometry, work methods, and their measurement as they relate to the design of human-machine systems."First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Economic analysis of engineering decisions under uncertainty. Financial engineering  basics including time value of money, cash flow estimation, and asset evaluation. Make versus  buy decisions. Comparison of project alternatives accounting for taxation, depreciation,  inflation, and risk.""Concepts, optimization and analysis techniques, and applications of operations research. Formulation of mathematical models for systems, concepts, and methods of improving search, linear programming and sensitivity analysis, network models, and integer programming.""Introduction of key concepts in the design and analysis of production systems. Topics include inventory control, forecasting, material requirement planning, project planning and scheduling, operations scheduling, and other production systems such as Just-In-Time (JIT), warehousing, and global supply chains.""Theory and applications related to metal casting, welding, polymer processing, powder metallurgy, and composites manufacturing."Statistical methods for process improvement. Simple quality assurance principles and tools.  Measurement system precision and accuracy assessment. Control charts. Process capability assessment. Experimental design and analysis for process improvement. Significant external project in process improvement.Summer professional work period.Professional work period for a maximum of one semester per academic year.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Quantitative  introduction of sustainability concepts in production planning and inventory control. Review of material recovery (recycling) and product/component recovery (remanufacturing) from productivity perspectives. Sustainability rubrics ranging from design and process to systems. Application to multi-echelon networks subject to forward/backward flow of material and information. Closed-loop supply chains. Comparative study of sustainable vs. traditional models for local and global production systems."Development and analysis of simulation models using a simulation language. Application to various areas of manufacturing and service systems such as assembly, material handling, and customer queues. Utilizing model output to make important business decisions. Fitting of data to statistical distributions. Introduction to Markov processes and other queuing models.""Overview of electrical circuit theory and its relationship to industrial control systems.   Theory and application of transducers in the form of sensors and actuators, with applications in manufacturing, distribution and mechanical systems.   Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC), their programming and use for automation solutions.   Introduction of automated identification systems such as Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) and Bar Coding technologies.""A large, open-ended design project related to an enterprise. Application of engineering design principles including problem definition, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation.""Assessment, accommodation, and control of geometric variability in manufacturing processes, specifically composites, metalcasting, welding, machining, and powder metallurgy. Techniques include the design of the component, tooling and process plan.  The use of contact and noncontact measurement methods to assess variation.""Exploration of biology, materials, body mechanics, manufacturing, quality control, and ethics and the intersection of these subjects as they relate to biomedical manufacturing.""Fixturing and tooling requirements for manufacturing process planning, geometric dimensioning and  tolerancing, computer aided inspection, cellular and flexible manufacturing, and facility layout. Lean manufacturing principles and controlled flow production.""Representation and interpretation of curves, surfaces and solids. Parametric curves and surfaces and solid modeling. Use of CAD software and CAD/CAM integration. Computer numerical control, CNC programming languages, and process planning.""Sales process methodology, techniques for building professional   relationships, sales automation software, prospecting and account   development, market analysis and segmentation, responding to   RFQ's and RFP's in written and verbal form.  Developing technical value   propositions and competitive positioning, evaluating organizational   decision processes and people, technical marketing strategies, sales   closing strategies.""Case studies and experiential lessons on the development and   application of technical sales strategies.  Specific topics include   developing pricing and distribution strategies, managing a sales   staff and channel, developing sales teams and global sales plans, bid   and negotiation strategies, time management skills, and implementing   sales automation technologies.""Application of team design concepts to projects of a multidisciplinary nature. Concurrent treatment of design, manufacturing and life cycle considerations. Application of design tools such as CAD, CAM and FEM. Design methodologies, project scheduling, cost estimating, quality control, manufacturing processes. Development of a prototype and appropriate documentation in the form of written reports, oral presentations, computer models and engineering drawings.""Build and test of a conceptual design. Detail design, manufacturability, test criteria and procedures. Application of design tools such as CAD and CAM and manufacturing techniques such as rapid prototyping. Development and testing of a full-scale prototype with appropriate documentation in the form of design journals, written reports, oral presentations and computer models and engineering drawings.""Design, analysis, and implementation of e-commerce systems. Information infrastructure, enterprise models, enterprise processes, enterprise views. Data structures and algorithms used in e-commerce systems, SQL, exchange protocols, client/server model, web-based views.""Introduction to data warehouses and knowledge discovery. Techniques for data mining, including probabilistic and statistical methods, genetic algorithms and neural networks, visualization techniques, and mathematical programming. Advanced topics include web-mining and mining of multimedia data. Case studies from both manufacturing and service industries. A computing project is required.""Independent study and work in the areas of industrial engineering design, practice, or research.""Independent study and work in the areas of industrial engineering design, practice, or research."Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Principles and practices for research tasks at the M.S. level including proposal writing, presentations, paper preparation, and project management.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Responsible conduct of research at the M.S. level, including ethical issues in peer review, conflicts of interest, mentoring, human subjects and live animals, data management, and collaboration.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Quantitative  introduction of sustainability concepts in production planning and inventory control. Review of material recovery (recycling) and product/component recovery (remanufacturing) from productivity perspectives. Sustainability rubrics ranging from design and process to systems. Application to multi-echelon networks subject to forward/backward flow of material and information. Closed-loop supply chains. Comparative study of sustainable vs. traditional models for local and global production systems."Market-based allocation mechanisms from quantitative economic systems perspective. Pricing and costing models designed and analyzed with respect to decentralized decision processes, information requirements, and coordination. Financial Engineering Techniques. Case studies and examples from industries such as regulated utilities, semiconductor manufacturers, and financial engineering services.""Formulation and solution of deterministic network flow problems including shortest path, minimum cost flow, and maximum flow. Network and graph formulations of combinatorial problems including assignment, matching, and spanning trees. Introduction to deterministic and stochastic dynamic programming.""Introduction to modeling and analysis of manufacturing and service systems subject to uncertainty. Topics include the Poisson process, renewal processes, Markov chains, and Brownian motion. Applications to inventory systems, production system design, production scheduling, reliability, and capacity planning.""Introduction to the theory of machine shop systems. Complexity results for various systems such as job, flow and open shops. Applications of linear programming, integer programming, network analysis. Enumerative methods for machine sequencing. Introduction to stochastic scheduling.""Event scheduling, process interaction, and continuous modeling techniques. Probability and statistics related to simulation parameters including run length, inference, design of experiments, variance reduction, and stopping rules. Aspects of simulation languages.""Statistical methods and theory applicable to problems of industrial process monitoring and improvement. Statistical issues in industrial measurement; Shewhart, CUSUM, and other control charts; feedback control; process characterization studies; estimation of product and process characteristics; acceptance sampling, continuous sampling and sequential sampling; economic and decision theoretic arguments in industrial statistics.""Probabilistic modeling and inference in engineering reliability; lifetime models, product limit estimator, probability plotting, maximum likelihood estimation for censored data, Bayesian methods in reliability, system reliability models, competing risk analysis, acceleration models and analysis of accelerated test data; analysis of recurrence data; planning studies to obtain reliability data.""Formulation of optimization problems as mathematical models, including linear programming, integer programming concepts, multi-objective optimization, and bilevel optimization. Introduction to classic optimization algorithms, including Simplex, cutting plane, and branch-and-bound. Basic concepts of duality theory and sensitivity analysis. Using computer solvers (Matlab and Gusek) to obtain optimal solutions to optimization models.""Mathematical basics for dealing with reliability data, theory, and analysis. Bayesian reliability analysis. Engineering ethics in safety evaluations. Case studies of accidents in large technological systems. Fault and event tree analysis.""Economic Order Quantity, dynamic lot sizing, newsboy, base stock, and (Q,r) models. Material Requirements Planning, Just-In-Time (JIT), variability in production systems, push and pull production systems, aggregate and workforce planning, and capacity management. Supply Chain Contracts.""Materials, processes and systems required to produce the major components (blades, towers, nacelles) of megawatt scale wind turbines. Transportation, manufacturing siting and procurement decisions as it relates to these large components in an expanding industry.""Introduction to rapid prototyping processes and other rapid manufacturing methodologies. Operating principles and characteristics of current and developing rapid prototyping processes. Use of rapid prototypes in product design, development, and service. Selection of rapid prototyping systems based on rapid methodologies used in manufacturing processes and rapid tooling approaches.""Assessment, accommodation, and control of geometric variability in manufacturing processes, specifically composites, metalcasting, welding, machining, and powder metallurgy. Techniques include the design of the component, tooling and process plan.  The use of contact and noncontact measurement methods to assess variation.""Exploration of biology, materials, body mechanics, manufacturing, quality control, and ethics and the intersection of these subjects as they relate to biomedical manufacturing.""Representation and interpretation of curves, surfaces and solids. Parametric curves and surfaces and solid modeling. Use of CAD software and CAD/CAM integration. Computer numerical control, CNC programming languages, and process planning."Methods for continuous quality improvement in process analysis. The systems analysis for process improvement model based on W. Edwards Deming. Quality function deployment methods. Case studies of applications to manufacturing and other heavy industries. Use of process analysis computerized programs and tools for design analysis."Introduction to engineering management (EM) concepts and tools needed to form, develop and manage cross-disciplinary distributed engineering teams working in research and development (R&D). Topics include: Understanding R&D organizations, team and workgroups, job design, organizational effectiveness, and leading technical professionals. Overview of current and emerging research in EM.""Application of decision theory principles and tools to evaluate alternative complex engineering systems based on technical design requirements.  Systems engineering methods are presented, with applications in aerospace, energy, and manufacturing domains.  Methods for identifying and mitigating risk and uncertainty are presented.""Introduction to organized multidisciplinary approach to designing and developing systems. Concepts, principles, and practice of systems engineering as applied to large integrated systems. Life cycle costing, scheduling, risk management, functional analysis, conceptual and detail design, test and evaluation, and systems engineering planning and organization.   Not available for degrees in industrial engineering.""Design for reliability, maintainability, usability, supportability, producibility, disposability, and life cycle costs in the context of the systems engineering process. Students will be required to apply the principles of systems engineering to a project including proposal, program plan, systems engineering management plan, and test and evaluation plan.   Not available for degrees in industrial engineering.""Introduction to the theoretical foundation and methods associated with the design for large-scale complex engineered systems, including objective function formation, design reliability, value-driven design, product robustness, utility theory, economic factors for the formation of a value function and complexity science as a means of detecting unintended consequences in the product behavior.""Systems view of projects and the processes by which they are implemented. Focuses on qualitative and quantitative tools and techniques of project management. Topics will include organizational structure types; project selection methodologies; simulation and optimization; and earned value management. Case studies will be included, and a group project required.""Anatomical, physiological, and biomechanical bases of physical ergonomics. Anthropometry, body mechanics, strength of biomaterials, human motor control.  Use of bioinstrumentation, passive industrial surveillance techniques and active risk assessment techniques. Acute injury and cumulative trauma disorders. Static and dynamic biomechanical modeling. Emphasis on low back, shoulder and hand/wrist biomechanics.""Human factors methods applied to interface requirements, design, prototyping, and evaluation. Concepts related to understanding user characteristics, design principles, usability analysis, methods and techniques for design and evaluation of the interface. The evaluation and design of the information presentation characteristics of a wide variety of interfaces: web sites (e-commerce), mobile applications, and information presentation systems (cockpits, instrumentation, etc.).""Investigation of the human interface to consumer and industrial systems and products, providing a basis for their design and evaluation. Discussions of human factors in the product design process: modeling the human during product use; usability; human factors methods in product design evaluation; user-device interface; safety, warnings, and instructions for products; considerations for human factors in the design of products for international use.""Physical and psychological factors affecting human performance in systems. Signal detection theory, human reliability modeling, information theory, and performance shaping applied to safety, reliability, productivity, stress reduction, training, and human/equipment interface design. Laboratory assignments related to system design and operation.""Design, analysis, and implementation of e-commerce systems. Information infrastructure, enterprise models, enterprise processes, enterprise views. Data structures and algorithms used in e-commerce systems, SQL, exchange protocols, client/server model, web-based views.""The design and analysis of enterprise models to support information engineering of enterprise-wide systems. Representation of system behavior and structure including process modeling, information modeling, and conceptual modeling. Applications in enterprise application integration, enterprise resource planning systems, product data management systems, and manufacturing execution systems.""Introduction to data warehouses and knowledge discovery. Techniques for data mining, including probabilistic and statistical methods, genetic algorithms and neural networks, visualization techniques, and mathematical programming. Advanced topics include web-mining and mining of multimedia data. Case studies from both manufacturing and service industries. A computing project is required.""Principles and practices for requirements engineering as part of the product development process with emphasis on software systems engineering. Problem definition, problem analysis, requirements analysis, requirements elicitation, validation, specifications. Case studies using requirements engineering methods and techniques.""Design and implementation of systems for the collection, maintenance, and usage of information needed for manufacturing operations, such as process control, quality, process definition, production definitions, inventory, and plant maintenance. Topics include interfacing with multiple data sources, methods to utilize the information to improve the process, system architectures, and maintaining adequate and accurate data for entities internal and external to the enterprise to achieve best manufacturing practices."Advanced study of a research topic in the field of industrial engineering."Principles and practices for conducting research at the Ph.D. level, including problem definition, proposal writing, presentations, conference proceedings, paper preparation, and project management.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Responsible conduct of research at the Ph.D. level, including ethical issues in peer review, conflicts of interest, mentoring, human subjects and live animals, data management, and collaboration.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Modeling techniques to evaluate performance and address issues in design, control, and operation of systems. Markov models of single-stage make-to-order and make-to-stock systems. Approximations for non-Markovian systems. Impact of variability on flow lines. Open and closed queuing networks.""Develop nonlinear models, convex sets and functions, optimality conditions, Lagrangian duality, unconstrained minimization techniques. Constrained minimization techniques covering penalty and barrier functions, sequential quadratic programming, the reduced gradient method.""Integer programming including cutting planes, branch and bound, and Lagrangian relaxation. Introduction to complexity issues and search-based heuristics.""Mathematical programming with uncertain parameters; modeling risk within optimization; multi-stage recourse and probabilistically constrained modes; solution and approximation algorithms including dual decomposition and progressive hedging; and applications to planning, allocation and design problems.""Theory, algorithm, and computer implementation of optimization models. Simplex, Benders decomposition, computational complexity, mixed integer linear program, linear program with complementarity constraints, inverse optimization, bilevel discrete optimization. CPLEX, Matlab, and Tomlab will be used for computer implementation.""Current engineering methods for the product life cycle process. Feature-based design, computer-aided process planning, and data-driven product engineering.""Research topic development, literature evaluation, experimental design, use of bioinstrumentation, data collection, basic data interpretation, statistical analysis, manuscript preparation.""Provides an overview of human cognitive capabilities and limitations in the design of products, work places, and large systems. Contexts vary broadly and could range from simple use of mobile devices to an air-traffic control or nuclear plant command center. Course focuses on what we can infer about users' thoughts and feelings based on what we can measure about their performance and physiological state. Covers the challenge of designing automated systems."Advanced topics related to Ph.D. research in industrial engineering under the direction of the instructor.Professional work period for a maximum of one semester per academic year.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Basic concepts of practical computer and Internet security: passwords, firewalls, antivirus software, malware, social networking, surfing the Internet, phishing, and wireless networks. This class is intended for students with little or no background in information technology or security. Basic knowledge of word processing required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Participation in cyber defense competition driven by scenario-based network design. Includes computer system setup, risk assessment and implementation of security systems, as well as defense of computer and network systems against trained attackers. Team based.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Detailed examination of networking standards, protocols, and their implementation. TCP/IP protocol suite, network application protocols.  Network security issues, attack and mitigation techniques. Emphasis on laboratory experiments.""Computer, software, and data security: basic cryptography, security policies, multilevel security models, attack and protection mechanisms, legal and ethical issues.""Computer system and network security: implementation, configuration, testing of security software and hardware, network monitoring. Authentication, firewalls, vulnerabilities, exploits, countermeasures. Study and use of attack tools. Ethics in information assurance. Emphasis on laboratory experiments.""Basic concepts of secure communication, DES and AES, public-key cryptosystems, elliptic curves, hash algorithms, digital signatures, applications. Relevant material on number theory and finite fields."Legal and ethical issues in computer security. State and local codes and regulations. Privacy issues."Basic principles of covert communication, steganalysis, and forensic analysis for digital images. Steganographic security and   capacity, matrix embedding, blind attacks, image forensic detection and device identification techniques. Related material on coding   theory, statistics, image processing, pattern recognition.""Fundamentals of computer and network forensics, forensic duplication and analysis, network surveillance, intrusion detection and response, incident response, anonymity and pseudonymity, privacy-protection techniques, cyber law, computer security policies and guidelines, court testimony and report writing, and case studies. Emphasis on hands-on experiments.""Techniques and tools for understanding the behavior of software/hardware systems based on reverse engineering. Flaw hypothesis, black, grey, and white box testing as well as other methods for testing the security of software systems. Discussion of counter-reverse engineering techniques."Projects or seminar in Information Assurance."Capstone design course which integrates the security design process. Design of a security policy. Creation of a security plan. Implementation of the security plan. The students will attack each other's secure environments in an effort to defeat the security systems. Students evaluate the security plans and the performance of the plans. Social, political and ethics issues. Student self-evaluation, journaling, final written report."One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Exploration of the nature of visual perception in relation to issues of visual communication, problem solving, envisioning information, and visual thinking. Studio assignments to be digitized and sent to instructor electronically for evaluation and critique.""Half-semester course. Introduction to wood's physical properties, its potential as an expressive medium, and basic wood working hand tools and techniques.""Half semester course. Introduction to basic jewelry/metals design and fabrication. Forming, texturing, and joining techniques (soldering/riveting) will be explored and applied to two projects.""Half-semester course providing an introduction to ceramic techniques including hand-building, high fire and low fire glaze applications and expressive approaches. The emphasis is on creative communication through ceramics.""Introduction to relief, monoprint, lithographic and intaglio printing as methods for visual communication and expression."The impact of changing visual relationships emphasizing physical and psychological and cultural color concepts. Additive and subtractive mixing and color interaction exercises and assignments using various color media.Introduction to film camera operation and traditional black and white darkroom methods for visual communication and creative expression. Film cameras required for class but may be checked out for short periods during semester."Half-semester course. Introduction to image acquisition, Adobe PhotoShop and Illustrator.""Half-semester course. Introduction to preparation of painting grounds, color mixing, manipulation of paint and pictorial space as methods for visual communication and expression."Half semester course. Introduction to two-dimensional and three-dimensional textile techniques used for visual communication and expression."This course will include the functions and operations of the digital camera, scanning and other image input devices, digital image manipulation, software usage and support, color management and printing, presentation of images, compositional dynamics and the development of ""seeing"" as a medium of design, expression, and communication. Students should have access to a good or high quality digital camera with the ability to separately adjust shutter speed, f/stop and exposure, a laptop with updated Adobe Photoshop software, and enough digital storage for all class assignments.""This course will include the functions and operations of the digital camera, scanning and other image input devices, digital image manipulation, software usage and support, color management and printing, presentation of images, compositional dynamics and the development of ""seeing"" as a medium of design, expression, and communication. Students should have access to a good or high quality digital camera with the ability to separately adjust shutter speed, f/stop and exposure, a laptop with updated Adobe Photoshop software, and enough digital storage for all class assignments.""Photography as a creative medium of art, design, expression and communication. Camera techniques and black and white wet lab processing taught. Alternative processes explored as time permits. 35 mm camera with manual exposure controls is required.""Photography as a creative medium of art,design, expression and communication. Camera techniques and black and white wet lab processing taught. Alternative processes explored as time permits. 35 mm camera with manual exposure controls is required."A continuation of DSN S 131 (Design Representation). Further development of perceptual drawing skills from a variety of subject matter. Continued practice with drawing materials and techniques with emphasis on tonal and color media."Fundamentals of painting using water-based media applied to observation-based painting. Subject matter may include working from actual or two-dimensional references of still life, landscape, architectural space, and the human form.""Fundamentals of painting using water-based media applied to observation-based painting. Subject matter may include working from actual or two-dimensional references of still life, landscape, architectural space, and the human form.""Fundamentals of painting using acrylic and oil media applied to observation-based painting. Subject matter may include working from actual or two-dimensional references of still life, landscape, and the human form.""Fundamentals of painting using acrylic and oil media applied to observation-based painting. Subject matter may include working from actual or two-dimensional references of still life, landscape, and the human form."Integration and exploration of materials and methods that combine traditional and innovative approaches. Emphasis on conceptual development."Introduction to  3D modeling using computer and available software. Modeling, texturing, lighting, and rendering with respect to 3D object and still scene creation.""Introduction to 3D modeling using computer and available software. Modeling, texturing, lighting, and rendering with respect to 3D object and still scene creation."Study and application of methods used by contemporary artists for the purpose of generating ideas for new work. Field trip."Exploration of issues and directions in current art. Readings, discussions, and studio research projects to build an experimental and applied knowledge base for understanding each student's place in the contemporary art world.""Overview of American studio furniture since 1940 including noted makers, important examples, and diverse approaches. Discussion of workmanship and the principles of furniture design. Field trip."Design and production of basic furniture forms in wood.  Introduction to power tools.  Develop an individual design process including an understanding of scale and proportion.  Develop a deeper understanding of wood and the social and environmental implications of choices in regards to materials and processes used in furniture production.Design and production of basic furniture forms in wood.  Introduction to power tools. Develop an individual design process including an understanding of scale and proportion.  Develop a deeper understanding of wood and the social and environmental implications of choices in regards to materials and processes used in furniture production."Further investigation of expressive forms and techniques in ceramics; introduction to throwing on the wheel, to exploration of utilitarian and sculptural approaches in the medium, and to glaze research and electric kiln firing.""Further investigation of expressive forms and techniques in ceramics; introduction to throwing on the wheel, to exploration of utilitarian and sculptural approaches in the medium, and to glaze research and electric kiln firing.""Studio basics and professional techniques in black & white, continuous tone, and color. Emphasis on tools, materials, and rendering.""Continued study of traditional and contemporary metalsmithing fabrication techniques applicable to jewelry and object construction, including container forms. Emphasis on design, modeling and rendering techniques and progressive skill development. Basic stone setting and lost wax casting introduced.""Continued study of traditional and contemporary metalsmithing fabrication techniques applicable to jewelry and object construction, including container forms. Emphasis on design, modeling and rendering techniques and progressive skill development. Basic stone setting and lost wax casting introduced.""Contemporary issues in studio arts explored through lectures, presentations and critiques.""Application of painting, drawing, and image making techniques to communication. Development of technical abilities using illustration software. Digital and print production techniques."Studio problems in illustration emphasizing composition and communication. Problem solving methodologies.Continuation and expansion of concepts and processes from introductory photography. The class begins with advanced film camera techniques and experimentation with medium and large format cameras. It then moves into digital and color photography while also addressing output and presentation. Emphasis will be on the use of photography for visual communication and creative expression.Continuation and expansion of concepts and processes from introductory photography. The class begins with advanced film camera techniques and experimentation with medium and large format cameras. It then moves into digital and color photography while also addressing output and presentation. Emphasis will be on the use of photography for visual communication and creative expression.Drawing from the human figure.Drawing from the human figure."Exploration of alternative materials (primarily non-metallics, both natural and manufactured) applicable to the design and creation of small designed objects and adornment. Students will learn additive and reductive processes, experiment with found object inclusion, rubber mold- making, and resin casting. A series of finished pieces will result. Open to all majors in the College of Design.""This course deals with three dimensional problems in visual invention, organization, and expression emphasizing creative manipulation of tools, materials, and techniques as means for three dimensional thinking. Projects cover the additive (modeling), subtractive (carving), substitutional (casting) as well as constructive techniques."Rendering techniques applied to different types of biological and scientific subjects emphasizing communication.  The use of traditional and digital media.  Term project required.Painting using acrylic and oil media; composition and expression.Painting using acrylic and oil media; composition and expression.Introduction to woven textile construction using commercial and hand-dyed yarns. Emphasis on technical development of weaving as a means for personal expression as well as an understanding of its role within the applied arts.Introduction to woven textile construction using commercial and hand-dyed yarns. Emphasis on technical development of weaving as a means for personal expression as well as an understanding of its role within the applied arts."Textile hand-dyeing and discharge methods on fabric to create complex surfaces. Other surface embellishment techniques, such as hand and machine stitching and application of textile pigments, will be introduced. Emphasis is on technical skill development and research, as well as creative use of textile surface design techniques for artistic expression.""Textile hand-dyeing and discharge methods on fabric to create complex surfaces. Other surface embellishment techniques, such as hand and machine stitching and application of textile pigments, will be introduced. Emphasis is on technical skill development and research, as well as creative use of textile surface design techniques for artistic expression.""Textile hand-printing methods on fabric including block, stencil and screen-printing using dyes, discharging agents and pigments. Digital printing on fabric will be introduced. Experimental printing methods will also be explored. Emphasis on research and development of surface design techniques as a means for personal expression.""Textile hand-printing methods on fabric including block, stencil and screen-printing using dyes, discharging agents and pigments. Digital printing on fabric will be introduced. Experimental printing methods will also be explored. Emphasis on research and development of surface design techniques as a means for personal expression."In-depth exploration of digital or traditional design and block cutting processes (computer/laser cutter/CNC router or drawing/chisels). Use relief printmaking to create a unified body of prints from those blocks. Emphasis is on experimental and creative use of printmaking with study of contemporary trends."Explore the techniques and aesthetic qualities of black and white and color relief printmaking with woodcuts, computer/laser cutter/CNC router blocks, or photopolymer plates. Emphasis is on experimental and creative use of printmaking with study of contemporary trends.""Explore the techniques and aesthetic qualities of black and white and color intaglio printmaking primarily through etching, aquatint, laser-cut plates and collagraph processes. Students will generate imagery through traditional drawing, collage and digital processes. Unique, one-of-a-kind black and white and color prints from Plexiglas will also be introduced. Emphasis is on experimental and creative use of printmaking for artistic expression.""Explore the techniques and aesthetic qualities of black and white and color intaglio printmaking primarily through etching, aquatint, laser-cut plates and collagraph processes. Students will generate imagery through traditional drawing, collage and digital processes. Unique, one-of-a-kind black and white and color prints from Plexiglas will also be introduced. Emphasis is on experimental and creative use of printmaking for artistic expression.""Examine the techniques and aesthetic qualities of lithography primarily through hand-drawn and photographic plates. Students may generate imagery through traditional drawing, collage or digital processes. Emphasis is on experimental and creative use of printmaking for artistic expression. For those taking the course for a second semester, focus is on stone lithography and increased work with color.""Examine the techniques and aesthetic qualities of lithography primarily through hand-drawn and photographic plates. Students may generate imagery through traditional drawing, collage or digital processes. Emphasis is on experimental and creative use of printmaking for artistic expression. For those taking the course for a second semester, focus is on stone lithography and increased work with color."An introduction to issues of design and fabrication of furniture focusing on sustainability. Exploration of the effect of consumers on design and how this affects our environment and our global society."The artist/designer's role in sustainable development with a focus on cultural understanding of the collaborating communities. Class discussion, visual exercises, and the creation of creative collaborative service-learning projects such as product design, habitat design, and visual arts projects. Preorientation for travel to Ghana in ARTIS 363.""Traveling studio to Ghana, West Africa; an experiential tour of arts and history combined with design focused collaborative service-learning projects. Projects may include product development, design consultation, sustainable building design, and learning and teaching of visual arts. Student teams will develop projects in partnership with Ghanaians.""Introduction to the tools required to create interactive artworks and kinetic sculptures. Students will learn how to build simple mechanical artworks and control those artworks with custom fabricated electronics. Students will use CNC routers, Laser Cutters and other computer assisted equipment to realize their projects.""Introduction to professional practices including development of portfolio (visual and written components). Lecture and presentation topics include applying to graduate school, internships, applying for jobs, grants/funding opportunities, professional networking, exhibition opportunities, and best practices for studio artists. Half-semester course. Required of all ISA majors.""Animation techniques using the computer and available software. Principles of character animation. Prior knowledge of modeling, lighting, texturing and rendering with available software is assumed.""Animation techniques using the computer and available software. Principles of animation. Prior knowledge of modeling, lighting, texturing, animation and rendering with computer and available software is assumed.""Animation techniques using the computer and available software. Principles of animation. Prior knowledge of modeling, lighting, texturing, animation and rendering with computer and available software is assumed.""Independent project based creation and development of ""frivolous and non-frivolous"" computer games in a cross-disciplinary team. Projects require cross-disciplinary teams.  Aspects of Indie development and computer/video game history will be discussed."Design and creation of more complex furniture forms with consideration of precedents and innovative techniques and approaches.  Continued development of a unique personal approach to the design and making of furniture. Refine your sensitivity to wood and understand the social and environmental implications of various materials used in furniture design and production.Design and creation of more complex furniture forms with consideration of precedents and innovative techniques and approaches.  Continued development of a unique personal approach to the design and making of furniture. Refine your sensitivity to wood and understand the social and environmental implications of various materials used in furniture design and production."In-depth investigation of ceramic forms and research into surfaces with an emphasis on personal art expression. Gas kiln firings, research into contemporary ceramic artists and development of increasingly skilled work are emphasized. Advanced students are expected to be capable of independent research. Focus is placed on portfolio development.""In-depth investigation of ceramic forms and research into surfaces with an emphasis on personal art expression. Gas kiln firings, research into contemporary ceramic artists and development of increasingly skilled work are emphasized. Advanced students are expected to be capable of independent research. Focus is placed on portfolio development.""Emphasis on metal fabrication and hollow construction techniques applicable to jewelry, functional objects and sculptural art forms. Processes introduced include raising, forming, and anticlastic shell forming techniques. Introduction to mechanisms and tool making. Advanced students are encouraged to integrate alternative materials and technologies. A focus is placed on independent research, professional engagement and portfolio development.""Emphasis on metal fabrication and hollow construction techniques applicable to jewelry, functional objects and sculptural art forms. Processes introduced include raising, forming, and anticlastic shell forming techniques. Introduction to mechanisms and tool making. Advanced students are encouraged to integrate alternative materials and technologies. A focus is placed on independent research, professional engagement and portfolio development.""Independent, advanced work in traditional alternative and/or digital photographic processes. Emphasis is on development of a unified body of work and research into contemporary photographers and aesthetic concern.""Independent, advanced work in traditional alternative and/or digital photographic processes. Emphasis is on development of a unified body of work and research into contemporary photographers and aesthetic concern.""Figurative and/or non-figurative drawing with advanced work in media, composition, and theory.""Figurative and/or non-figurative drawing with advanced work in media, composition, and theory.""Figurative and non-figurative painting with advanced work in media, composition, and theory.""Figurative and non-figurative painting with advanced work in media, composition, and theory.""Exploration of hand-printing methods on fabric including block, stencil, and screen-printing using dyes, discharging agents, and pigments. Individualized research and development of surface design techniques as means for personal expression.""This hands-on studio course will allow students to explore digital printing technology and its application to textile design for those working within industry as well as independent studio practitioners. Digital design development includes pattern repeats and photo manipulation to create unique textile designs for fashion, interior and fine art applications.""Independent, advanced work in printmaking processes. Emphasis is on development of a unified body of work and research into contemporary artists.""Independent, advanced work in printmaking processes. Emphasis is on development of a unified body of work and research into contemporary artists."Usage of professional video editing software and application of best practices for video production and post-production to realize original artworks. Creation of narrative and non-narrative videos and site specific video installations. prominent examples in the history of video art provide context for the coursework. Non-repeatable for graduate students.Special issues related to studio art. Topics vary each time offered.Student must have completed craft design coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis."Exhibition of artwork completed in the Post Baccalaureate program, required for fulfillment of certificate.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Cultural and historical aspects of art and design in Western Europe in preparation for study abroad. Area of study varies each time offered. Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."International study abroad program in western Europe. Visits to design studios, art museums, and educational facilities. Related activities depending on specific area of study which may vary each time offered.""Study and tours of museums, galleries, artist and/or designer studios and other areas of interest within art and design.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Written approval of supervising instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment. Supervised experience with a cooperating artist or studio. Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Capstone experience for the BFA degree, including the refinement of a final portfolio (visual and written components). Guest lecturers cover range of topics relevant to the professional practice of art and design. Course culminates in the planning, design and installation of the BFA group exhibition in a formal gallery setting. Half-semester course. Required of all ISA majors."Integration and exploration of materials and methods that combine traditional and innovative approaches. Emphasis on conceptual development."Animation techniques using the computer and available software. Principles of character animation. Prior knowledge of modeling, lighting, texturing and rendering with available software is assumed."Further investigations begun in ARTIS 408. Attention given to the workflow and management of creating animation and visualizations."Independent project based creation and development of ""frivolous and non-frivolous"" computer games in a cross-disciplinary team. Projects require cross-disciplinary teams.  Aspects of Indie development and computer/video game history will be discussed.""Readings and discussion of university level design education issues, studio/classroom observation, development of a teaching philosophy, lesson planning and presentation."Design and creation of more complex furniture forms with consideration of precedents and innovative techniques and approaches.  Continued development of a unique personal approach to the design and making of furniture. Refine your sensitivity to wood and understand the social and environmental implications of various materials used in furniture design and production."In-depth investigation of ceramic forms and research into surfaces with an emphasis on personal art expression. Gas kiln firings, research into contemporary ceramic artists and development of increasingly skilled work are emphasized. Advanced students are expected to be capable of independent research. Focus is placed on portfolio development.""Emphasis on metal fabrication and hollow construction techniques applicable to jewelry, functional objects and sculptural art forms. Processes introduced include raising, forming, and anticlastic shell forming techniques. Introduction to mechanisms and tool making. Advanced students are encouraged to integrate alternative materials and technologies. A focus is placed on independent research, professional engagement and portfolio development.""Independent, advanced work in traditional alternative and/or digital photographic processes. Emphasis is on development of a unified body of work and research into contemporary photographers and aesthetic concern.""Figurative and/or non-figurative drawing with advanced work in media, composition, and theory.""Figurative and non-figurative painting with advanced work in media, composition, and theory.""Exploration of hand-printing methods on fabric including block, stencil, and screen-printing using dyes, discharging agents, and pigments. Individualized research and development of surface design techniques as means for personal expression.""This hands-on studio course will allow students to explore digital printing technology and its application to textile design for those working within industry as well as independent studio practitioners. Digital design development includes pattern repeats and photo manipulation to create unique textile designs for fashion, interior and fine art applications."In-depth exploration of digital or traditional design and block cutting processes (computer/laser cutter/CNC router or drawing/chisels). Use relief printmaking to create a unified body of prints from those blocks. Emphasis is on experimental and creative use of printmaking with study of contemporary trends."Explore the techniques and aesthetic qualities of black and white and color intaglio printmaking primarily through etching, aquatint, laser-cut plates and collagraph processes. Students will generate imagery through traditional drawing, collage and digital processes. Unique, one-of-a-kind black and white and color prints from Plexiglas will also be introduced. Emphasis is on experimental and creative use of printmaking for artistic expression.""Examine the techniques and aesthetic qualities of lithography primarily through hand-drawn and photographic plates. Students may generate imagery through traditional drawing, collage or digital processes. Emphasis is on experimental and creative use of printmaking for artistic expression. For those taking the course for a second semester, focus is on stone lithography and increased work with color.""Ongoing weekly critiques and dialog about sources, methods, and progress of studio projects. Graduate students will learn to articulate their ideas from concept to creation. The interaction of students at different levels in a broad spectrum of studio courses will reveal commonalities and connections between all of the visual arts, accelerating individual creative development."Ongoing critiques and dialog about progress of studio projects. Graduate students will learn to articulate their ideas from concept to creation. Emphasis will be on the examination of professional practices of artists.Ongoing critiques and dialog about progress of studio projects. Graduate students will learn to articulate their ideas from concept to creation. Emphasis will be on the examination of creative business opportunities related to studentsÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ areas of interest."Ongoing weekly critiques and dialog about sources, methods, and progress of studio projects. Graduate students will learn to articulate their ideas from concept to creation. The interaction of students at different levels in a broad spectrum of studio courses will reveal commonalities and connections between all of the visual arts, accelerating individual creative development."Usage of professional video editing software and application of best practices for video production and post-production to realize original artworks. Creation of narrative and non-narrative videos and site specific video installations. prominent examples in the history of video art provide context for the coursework. Non-repeatable for graduate students.Special issues related to studio art. Topics vary each time offered.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Written approval of instructor and department chair on required form in advance of semester of enrollment.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered and may have prerequisites."International study abroad program in western Europe. Visits to design studios, art museums, and educational facilities. Related activities depending on specific area of study which may vary each time offered."Research strategies related to fine art and technology. Application of selected methods to specific issues."Exploration and application of media with various materials, methods and ideas.""Supervised off-campus learning experience with a prominent artist, designer, or firm."Selected issues in contemporary studio arts. Topics and readings vary each time offered.Research in Integrated Studio Arts.Research thesis.Research exhibition."The profession, issues, and the role of interior design.""Overview of issues related to the human/built environment interface: introduction to health and safety factors, ergonomics, anthropometrics, sensory perception, psycho-behavioral response, physical performance, cultural factors and universal design. Emphasis on application of human factor methods to the analysis, solution, and evaluation of design problems.""A survey of variables influencing the nature and function of ""interior"" environments.  Review of professional, geo-political, utilitarian, social-cultural, economic, humanistic, historical, technological, and other factors as generators of form and space.""Study and tours of areas of interest within the interior design profession such as manufacturers, design studios, showrooms and museums.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Perspective drawing, design sketching, and presentation drawings. Introduction to technical drawing conventions, and design drawings. Emphasis on drawing layout, line quality, and lettering. Use of various rendering media and techniques on 2D and 3D drawings. Overview of presentation techniques, both visual and verbal."Computer visualization techniques and applications; projects employing computer graphic methods."Enhanced creative interior design problem solving. Emphasis on research, spatial composition theories and graphic ideation and communication as applied to the interior design of small scale environments. Modeling and manual visualization techniques.""Human factors issues including ergonomics, human behavior and the requirements of special groups. Color theories related to interior spaces. Residential interior design and medium scale projects. Detail drawings, and expansion of visualization techniques.""Exploration of concepts, materials, and assemblies associated with development of planar interior elements including floors, walls, ceiling, windows, and finishes. Fiber, plastic, sheet metal, and other surfacing materials. Attention to related human factors, testing, detailing, specifications writing and end-use application.""Exploration of interior design concepts, materials, and assemblies as they contribute to the user, health, safety and general well-being. Wood, steel, masonry, and glass assemblies. Attention to related human factors, testing, codes, detailing, specifications writing and end-use application.""Exploration of concepts, materials, assemblies associated with building service systems. Overview of electrical, lighting, acoustical, HVAC, plumbing and other non-structural building features. Attention to related human factors, testing, codes, detailing, specifications writing and end-use application.""Exploration of building construction concepts, materials, and assemblies and their influence on interior design. Attention to human factors, codes, detailing, and other interior design issues related to buildings.""Theoretical approaches to evaluation of interior finishes, furnishings, and decorative arts in relation to parallel developments in art and architecture, from a critical, historical and multicultural perspective. Focus on pre-1850.""Advanced theoretical approaches to evaluation of interior finishes, furnishings, and decorative arts in relation to parallel developments in art and architecture from a critical, historical, and multicultural perspective. Focus on mid-nineteenth and twentieth century."An investigation of the 20th century roots of modern Italian design and its contemporary form.  Lectures and seminar presentations highlight major Italian designers and internationally significant design in the 20th century.  Focus is on innovative design that exhibits a synthesis of formal and social functions."Study and tours of areas of interest within the interior design profession such as manufacturers, design studios, showrooms, and museums.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Procedural and ethical concerns relating to interior design internship. Preparation of placement credentials and formulation of personal goals. Internship plans and agreements.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Refined methods of problem identification design programming and problem solving, including theoretically-based concept development and refinement. Emphasis and compliance with codes and standards. Produce small and large scale projects. Alternative manual and computer-based visualization methods. Teamwork. Multi-cultural, study abroad option.""Emphasis on three-dimensional spatial development in large scale, multiple scale unit institutional projects. Inclusion of extensive design documentation. Expansion of alternative manual and computer-based visualization methods. Teamwork.""Emphasis on three-dimensional spatial development in large scale, multiple scale unit institutional projects. Inclusion of extensive design documentation. Expansion of alternative manual and computer-based visualization methods. Teamwork.""Study and tours of areas of interest within the interior design profession such as manufacturers, design studios, showrooms and museums.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Professional interior design off-campus experience."Organization and general management of the interior design office: agreements, business procedures, and professional ethics. Professional interior design issues and concerns.""Organization and general management of the interior design office: agreements, business procedures, and professional ethics. Professional interior design issues and concerns.""Emphasis on independent living within residential settings including specialized shelter, supportive services and housing management. Application of criteria appropriate for accessibility and functional performance of activities; universal design principles. Creative project provides service learning opportunities. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Design research and refined problem solving methods including functional analysis, programming and detailing.""Refinement of technical, analytical and theoretical problem-solving methods and comprehensive design documentation. In-depth development of interior design projects. Current issues in interior design."Study of selected interior design projects and designers practicing in an urban setting. Studio project examining issues related to interior design in an urban context.Study of selected interior design projects and designers practicing in an urban setting. Studio project examining issues related to interior design in an urban context.Student must have completed related interior design coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Student must have completed related interior design coursework appropriate to planned independent study. Offered on a graded basis or a satisfactory-fail basis.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered."An exploration of human nature as broadly defined and as applied to design of the built environment.  Consideration of human characteristics, responses and performance, at varying scales, as sources of design insight.  Topics vary each time offered.""Human factorsÌ¢‰âÂå¬ related to the nature, performance and accommodation of the individuals and small groups, including sensation and perception, physical requirements, anthropometrics, safety and other issues connecting human needs and built environmental responses.  Topics vary each time offered.""Human factors issues related to the nature, performance and accommodation of medium to large groups and settings. Emphasis on psychological, sociological, cultural, interpersonal safety, and related human needs and built environmental responses.  Topics vary each time offered."Survey of methodologies and methodological tools for varied end uses and drawn from wide ranging sources.  Emphasis on their organization and application to design of the human environment.  Topics vary each time offered."Methods of design research, analysis, programming and theory formulation."Methods of synthesizing design concepts and solutions."Methods of managing, translating, communicating and otherwise utilizing text, image, abstract and other forms of information.""New and specialized methodological trends, including subject or setting-specific methods.""Supervised practical application of interior design theory, materials, and practice to the educational process.""Study and tours of places of interior design-related interest such as manufacturers, design studios, related professional offices, showrooms, museums, and historical sites."Professional interior design off-campus experience."Emphasis on independent living within residential settings including specialized shelter, supportive services and housing management. Application of criteria appropriate for accessibility and functional performance of activities; universal design principles. Creative project provides service learning opportunities. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Design research and refined problem solving methods including functional analysis, programming and detailing.""Refinement of technical, analytical and theoretical problem-solving methods and comprehensive design documentation. In-depth development of interior design projects. Current issues in interior design.""Application of alternative design methods and sources of insight to the solution of human environmental design problems. Focus on the identification, formulation, refinement and application of theory to the design process. Emphasis on the pursuit of new discovery and innovative problem solving. Approaches, settings and scales vary each time offered."Examination of special issues with emphasis on their translation into design application.Examination of special issues with emphasis on their translation into design application.Examination of special issues with emphasis on their translation into design application.Examination of special issues with emphasis on their translation into design application.Examination of special issues with emphasis on their translation into design application.Intensive 2 to 4 week studio exploration. Topics vary each time offered."Presentation and discussion of cross-disciplinary design research theory, methods, and application.  Focus on the investigation, application, and communication of types of design research."Research strategies related to design. Application of selected methods to specific issues. Open to non-majors."Application of alternative design methods and sources of insight to the solution of human environmental design problems. Focus on the identification, formulation, refinement and application of theory to the design process. Emphasis on the pursuit of new discovery and innovative problem solving. Approaches, settings and scales vary each time offered.""Applied, off campus, professional interior design-related experience.""Overview of international studies, emphasizing cultural, geographic, economic, and political characteristics of   major world areas and nations.""Supervised instruction in an international setting, augmented by practical living experience."Multi-faceted exploration of a selected world region directed at developing a comprehensive understanding of a selected culture's role in contemporary society.Multi-faceted exploration of a selected world region directed at developing a comprehensive understanding of a selected culture's role in contemporary society.Multi-faceted exploration of a selected world region directed at developing a comprehensive understanding of a selected culture's role in contemporary society.Multi-faceted exploration of a selected world region directed at developing a comprehensive understanding of a selected culture's role in contemporary society.Multi-faceted exploration of a selected world region directed at developing a comprehensive understanding of a selected culture's role in contemporary society.Multi-faceted exploration of a selected world region directed at developing a comprehensive understanding of a selected culture's role in contemporary society."Capstone seminar in international studies focused on economic development, women's issues, war and ethnic conflict, population, the environment, globalization, human rights, international trade and business and other issues. Students develop a project on a subject linked to their area of professional interest or academic specialization.""Interdisciplinary study and analysis of agricultural systems, sustainable management, and impact on plants and animal biodiversity. International field experience in evaluating different agricultural systems and impact on biodiversity may be required. A program fee is charged to students for international study abroad."Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered or to integrate areas of study appropriate to special problems with international foci.   No more than 3 credits of IntSt 490 may be used in the International Studies major or minor."Students returning from study abroad gain perspective on the personal, academic, and professional impact of their time spent abroad through readings and discussions. Students will be expected to make one presentation about the culture they experienced to an audience outside ISU.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Offered as demand warrants. Five-day-long, nontechnical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five-day-long, nontechnical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Introduction to ecology and co-evolution of plants and animals; emphasis on dispersal, pollination, and plant-herbivore interactions; field and laboratory work, reading, discussion.""Placement with county conservation boards, camps, parks, etc. for experience as interpreters, rangers, and technicians.""An introduction to the principles of ecology at the population, community and ecosystem level. Field studies of local lakes, wetlands and prairies are used to examine factors controlling distributions, interactions, and roles of plants and animals in native ecosystems.""The biology, ecology, and behavior of birds with emphasis on field studies of local avifauna. Group projects stress techniques of population analysis and methodology for population studies.""Vertebrate and invertebrate animals of the Midwest are observed in nature either through passive observational techniques or active trapping exercises. Once identified, animals are placed in their proper taxonomic position (e.e., put onto the ""Tree of Life""). They also are put into ecological perspective, including habitat pereferences (i.e., wetland, lake, prairie, forest, river, edge), trophic position, and activity patterns. Conservation status is discussed.""A field-oriented introduction to the taxonomy and ecology of aquatic plants in lakes, wetlands and rivers. Individual or group projects."Principles of classification and evolution of vascular plants; taxonomic tools and collection techniques; use of keys. Field and laboratory studies emphasizing identification of local flowering plants and recognition of major plant families."Field and laboratory study of insects, their diversity, life history; emphasis on ecology and behavior.""Effects of geomorphology, soils, and land use on transport of water and materials (nutrients, contaminates) in watersheds. Fieldwork will emphasize investigations of the Iowa Great Lakes watershed.""Mechanisms and patterns in microevolution and macroevolution. Field exercises will emphasize studies of natural selection, adaptation, genetic variation, and population genetics of local plant and animal populations.""Animal coloniality, courtship, territoriality, predator defense, habitat selection, foraging, mating systems, and parental care will be examined in the field in order to evaluate various ecological and evolutionary theories of animal behavior.""Field-oriented introduction to the identification, life-history, and ecology of common, free-living freshwater invertebrates of north-temperate lakes, rivers, and wetlands. Emphasis on the role of invertebrates in aquatic food chains and litter processing.""Field and laboratory study of representative vertebrates of northwestern Iowa. Observations and experimentation emphasize ecological histories by integrating concepts of functional morphology, behavioral ecology, and evolutionary biology.""Ecology, behavior, and conservation biology of amphibians and reptiles with emphasis on their anatomy and morphology; temperature and water regulation; locomotion; life history; reproduction; population and community ecology; and conservation."Basic patterns and underlying physical and biotic causes of both regional and local distributions of plants and animals of North American prairies; field and laboratory analyses and projects."Fundamental knowledge and understanding of the scientific concepts related to the physio-chemical and biological environment. Problems and issues (global, national, regional, and local) associated with freshwater systems and how wetland restoration can be used to ameliorate problems. Discussion and application of basic tools used to assess aquatic toxicological problems."Nature of cultural and environmental evidence in archaeology and how they are used to model past human behavior and land use; emphasis on Iowa prehistory; basic reconnaissance surveying and excavation techniques."Sketching plants, animals and terrain. Visual communication, development of a personal style, and integration of typographic and visual elements on a page will be emphasized."Beginning to intermediate technical and compositional aspects of color photography of natural areas and their plants and animals."Descriptive and predictive GIS modeling techniques, spatial statistics, and map algebra. Application of GIS   modeling techniques to environmental planning and resource management.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use.   Credit for only Agron 563 or 563I may be applied for graduation.""Principles of plant population, community, and ecosystem ecology illustrated through studies of native   vegetation in local prairies, wetlands and forests. Group or individual projects.""Research opportunities for undergraduate students in the biological sciences.   No more than 9 credits in Biol 490 may be counted toward graduation and of those, only 6 credits may be applied to the major.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""Offered as demand warrants. Five day-long, non-technical introductions to a specific aspect of the natural   history of the Upper Midwest or techniques for studying natural history.""An extended field trip to study a particular type of ecosystem (prairie, coastal wetland, forest, alpine, coral reefs,   etc.) or the ecosystems of a specific region (Rocky Mountains, Gulf Coast, Appalachian Mountains, Deserts of   the Southwest, Central America, etc.). Prior to the field trip, there will be an orientation period and after each   field trip a review and synthesis period. A field trip fee will be assessed to cover travel expenses.""Structure and taxonomy of freshwater algae based on field collected material; emphasis on genus-level identifications, habitats visited include lakes, fens, streams, and rivers; algal ecology.""Placement with county conservation boards, camps, parks, schools, etc. for experience as interpreters, rangers,   technicians, and teachers."Analysis of aquatic ecosystems; emphasis on basic ecological principles; ecological theories tested in the field; identification of common plants and animals."Basic principles of fish interaction with the biotic and abiotic environment. Field methods, taxonomy, and biology of fish with emphasis on the fish fauna of northwestern Iowa."Field study of birds of the upper Midwest; extended field trip to Minnesota and Wisconsin; individual or group project.Population-and community-level examination of factors influencing the viability of plant and animal populations from both demographic and genetic perspectives; assessment of biodiversity; design and management of preserves."Analysis of Environmental Data will provide students with training in the theory and application of a range of   statistical techniques useful for the analysis of ecological and paleoecological data. Topics will include data   management, exploratory data analysis, regression analysis, direct and indirect ordination methods,   classification techniques, transfer functions and the analysis of temporal data. Practical classes will provide   hands-on training in the use of statistical and graphical software including R, CANOCO, C2, and TWINSPAN.   The course will be directed towards advanced undergraduate, graduate and working professionals in ecology   and paleoecology.""Ecological principles for the restoration of native ecosystems; establishment (site preparation, selection of seed   mixes, planting techniques) and management (fire, mowing, weed control) of native vegetation; evaluation of restorations. Emphasis on the restoration of prairie and wetland vegetation.""Relationships between soil formation, geomorphology, and environment. Soil description, classification, geography, mapping, and interpretation for land use.   Credit for only Agron 563 or 563I may be applied for graduation.""Ecology, classification, creation, restoration, and management of wetlands. Field studies will examine the composition, structure and functions of local natural wetlands and restored prairie pothole wetlands. Individual or group projects.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""The development and implementation of laboratory exercises suitable for inclusion in elementary, middle, high school, and community college biology and environmental courses. Exercises will be built around common organisms and ecosystems in Iowa. Field trips.""Identification and classification of the common fungi; techniques for identification, preservation, and culture practiced with members of the various fungi groups.""Field and laboratory study of freshwater diatoms; techniques in collection, preparation, and identification of diatom samples; study of environmental factors affecting growth, distribution, taxonomic characters; project design and execution including construction of reference and voucher collections and data organization and analysis."Graduate workshop on some aspect of the natural history of the Upper Midwest or on techniques for studying   natural history."Communication theory models and their application to the mass media; the mass communication process; organization, characteristics and responsibilities of the mass media; media literacy process.""Orientation to professional and pre-professional opportunities, writing for the mass media and curriculum requirements in the Greenlee School. Basic media writing preparation.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Generating story ideas, exercising news judgment and gathering information via interviews, observation and documentary sources to produce news and informational material for the mass media. Emphasis on analyzing and organizing information, as well as accuracy and principles of good writing. Use of AP Style.""Writing for newspapers, magazines and online media. Enhancing and refining skills in developing sources and generating story ideas. Information-gathering techniques, reporting and writing.""Researching, organizing, and writing for radio, television and online media. Basic principles of news programming and storytelling across electronic media platforms. An emphasis on development, content and structure.""Understanding and analysis of the visual message. Visual perception, visual communication theory, design syntax, design elements and how they are applied in journalism and mass communication.""Introduction to studio production using professional equipment. Course focus on visual concepts, maintenance and practical operation of studio equipment.""Creation of video productions for use as communication tools in advertising, promotions, short documentaries and public relations. Technical and artistic fundamentals of video production including planning, scripting, shooting, lighting and digital editing."Field techniques in single-camera video production used to shoot and edit visual stories. Introduction to electronic news gathering."Basic photojournalism techniques. Includes camera operation, lighting, composition and photo reproduction techniques for print or computer-mediated applications. Emphasis on using the camera as a reporting tool. Basic use of digital imaging and editing software. Ethical issues involving photojournalism. A digital SLR camera is required.""Advanced techniques and problem solving, both ethical and technical, for photographers who seek to be members of newsgathering teams. Photographic storytelling using a combination of audio and still photography techniques to report stories for print and web publications. Hands on experience with latest digital imaging technology. A digital SLR camera is required.""Visual storytelling concepts and principles for evaluating, constructing and designing information for the Web and other electronic publication systems. Issues of ethics and ownership of work pertinent to the new media.""Digital publishing and beginning techniques in layout, photo editing and vector artwork. Application of visual principles to design simple print projects.""Creating, designing and publishing content for mobile devices (e.g., cell phones and tablets). Use of digital publishing tools (e.g., In Design). Exposure to animation and video editing software.""Analysis of magazine industry and specific audiences served by print and online magazines. Editorial procedures and policies, advertising, circulation, and history of the industry. Individual study of magazines.""Reporting and writing short- and long- form stories for magazines, newspapers, corporate communication and the Web. Focus on   departmental stories, personal essays, trend or conflict articles and personality profiles. Emphasis on immersion reporting.   Majors may not apply both 344 and Engl 303 toward graduation.""Reporting and writing about government, business, and other institutions; identification of and access to public records; investigative reporting techniques; developing major stories about government and nonprofit organizations; and ethical issues.""Reporting and writing about science and technology topics for general audiences. Outlets for stories include print, broadcast and online media. Story topics include reporting about basic, applied sciences and social sciences, as well as ethical, political and policy issues related to science and technology.""Editing content for multiple platforms, including websites, magazines, newspapers, and newsletters. Adapting material for audiences, including selection and organization of text and visuals, grammar, punctuation, usage, logic and accuracy. Designing print and online layouts. Using search engine optimization and social media to promote content.""Application of advanced television techniques: writing, producing, and managing live and recorded information programs."Check with Greenlee School for course availability."Theory and research in mass communication processes and effects; the scientific process; methods of measuring, evaluating and reporting mass communication research.""Decision-making functions of media. Basic media market analysis, media organization and management, circulation and audience development, technological developments affecting management decisions, and relationships with labor and regulatory agencies that affect media operations.""Skills and strategies for editorial decision-making and management, including short and long range issue planning. Developing proposals, business plans and prototypes for content, design and layouts of publications for multiple platforms and diverse audiences, including new and existing online and print magazines, newspapers, newsletters and websites. Editing complex manuscripts, with continued emphasis on grammar, punctuation, usage, syntax and logic.""Issues and policies affecting historical, contemporary and future developments of electronic media and their technologies."Evolution of motion picture and television content and other visual technologies. Theories and techniques for evaluating and critiquing film and video."First Amendment law, libel, privacy, obscenity, contempt, copyright, trademark, the Federal Communications Act; laws affecting advertising, legal publication, and other business activities of the media.""Role of the mass media, including advertising and public relations, in shaping the social, economic and political history of America; impact of change in these areas on the development, traditions and philosophies of the media.""Ethics and professionalism in the practice of journalism, public relations and advertising.""A study of journalism's impact on literary writing and literature's impact on journalism, as seen through the works of esteemed American author-journalists.""Examination of historical and current communication technologies, including how they shape and are shaped by the cultural and social practices into which they are introduced.""World communication systems and social, political, and economic factors determining flow, character, and volume of news. Impact of media information and entertainment content on nations and societies. Comparative analysis of role and impact of traditional modes of communication, the mass media, and computer-mediated systems.""Portrayals of ethnic groups, gender, and social class in the media in news, advertising, information and entertainment; the effects of mass media on social issues and population groups.""Independent studies are research-based. Students may study problems associated with a medium, a professional specialization, a philosophical or practical concern, a reportorial method or writing technique, or a special topic in their field. Credit is not given for working on student or professional media without an accompanying research component.   No more than 3 credits of Jl MC 490 may be used toward a degree in journalism and mass communication or advertising."Seminars or one-time classes on topics of relevance to students in communication."Required of all Greenlee School majors. A 400-hour (for 3 credits) internship in the student's journalism and mass communication or advertising or public relations specialization. Assessment based on employer evaluations, student reports and faculty reviews. Available only to Greenlee School majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Initial, required internship. A 400-hour (for 3 credits) internship in the student's specialization. Assessment based on employer evaluations, student reports and faculty reviews. Available only to Greenlee School majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Optional internship in the student's specialization. Assessment based on employer evaluations, student reports and faculty reviews. Available only to Greenlee School majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Historical overview of mass communication theories. Examination of major areas of research activity and theoretical development related to organization, functions, and effects of mass communication.""Research methods in journalism and mass communication, including problem selection, sampling, hypothesis formulation, research design, data collection and analysis. Designing a research strategy appropriate for a variety of communication-related questions and assessing the appropriateness, validity, and generalizability of research results.""Decision-making functions of media. Basic media market analysis, media organization and management, circulation and audience development, technological developments affecting management decisions, and relationships with labor and regulatory agencies that affect media operations.""The process of developing professional communication and persuasion strategies, with emphasis on problem definition, behavioral objectives, situation analysis, strategy formulation, and justification through application of communication theories and research."Theories and research methods applied to the study and practice of public relations."Explores the theoretical frameworks in visual communication, including concepts of perception, visual language, visual persuasion, and the social, political and cultural implications of the use of images. Understanding of the function of images in changing knowledge, attitudes and behavior.""Analysis of magazine industry and specific audiences served by print and online magazines. Editorial procedures and policies, advertising, circulation, and history of the industry. Individual study of magazines.""Reporting and writing about science and technology topics for general audiences. Outlets for stories include print, broadcast and online media. Story topics include reporting about basic, applied sciences and social sciences, as well as ethical, political and policy issues related to science and technology.""Study of risk communication principles, models and theories applicable to any risk communication situation. Emphasis on science, technology and risk issues encountered in e.g., food, agriculture and veterinary medicine. Examines roles of scientists and communicators in cultivating a public informed about scientific and technological issues."Media roles and functions in society: Interplay and interrelationships between the media and a variety of social actors and forces: the mutual influence between social factors and mass media."Personal, organizational, and social implications of the use of communication technologies. Includes theories and empirical research across the continuum of perspectives, from techno-utopianism through an anti-technology stance.""World communication systems and social, political, and economic factors determining flow, character, and volume of news. Impact of media information and entertainment content on nations and societies. Comparative analysis of role and impact of traditional modes of communication, the mass media and computer-mediated systems."Supervised internship experience.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Overview of advanced study in journalism and mass communication with special emphasis on requirements for obtaining the master of science degree.Basic course for nonswimmers. Emphasis on two fundamental strokes and personal water safety skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Intermediate course. Emphasis on learning and improving five basic strokes and personal water safety skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Water related exercises, activities, and swimming workouts to improve physical fitness.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to fundamental badminton skills and strategic game play.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction to bowling skills and strategic game play.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction to fundamental golf skills and strategic game play.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction to fundamental racquetball skills and strategic game play.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction to fundamental ice skating skills and strategic game play.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to basic skills (forehand, backhand, service) and basic knowledge of game play.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Evaluation of fitness status. Exercises, activities, and programs to improve physical fitness. Improve physical fitness and weight control.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for only KIN 163 or 258 may be applied toward graduation."Fitness walking as an activity to improve health and fitness; values of this type of activity as a lifetime endeavor with knowledge and usage of pedometers.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Running as a physical activity to improve physical fitness and health.  Promotion of this activity as a lifetime endeavor.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction to fundamental skills of weight training and strategic game play.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Fundamentals of self defense, focusing on throwing with the hands, hips and feet as well as applying pins, chokes and arm-bars.  The physical skills will be taught focused on training through development of courtesy, integrity, perseverance, self control, & indomitable spirit.  Emphasis on learning a way of life that promotes personal development, physical health and citizenship.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Teaches fundamentals of self-defense, focusing on hand and foot striking and blocking techniques.  The physical skills will be taught focused on training through development of courtesy, integrity, perseverance, self-control and indomitable spirit.  It will be emphasized that each student learns a way of life that promotes personal development, physical health and citizenship.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Teaches advanced application of self-defense focusing on hand and foot striking and blocking techniques.  The physical skills will be taught focused on training through development of courtesy, integrity, perseverance, self-control and indomitable spirit.  It will be emphasized that each student learns a way of life that promotes personal development, physical health and citizenship.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Teaches fundamentals of self-defense focusing on joint locks, pressure points and throwing techniques to escape from an attacker.  The physical skills will be taught focused on training through development of courtesy, integrity, perseverance, self-control and indomitable spirit.  It will be emphasized that each student learns a way of life that promotes personal development, physical health & citizenship.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to fundamental volleyball skills and strategic game play.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction to fundamental soccer skills and strategic game play.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Coverage of behavioral skills needed to adopt and maintain lifestyles conducive to fitness and wellness.  Provides students with knowledge and skills needed to adopt and maintain healthy lifestyles.  Includes self-assessments and content on physical activity, nutrition, weight control, stress management and other lifestyle behaviors related to health.  For non-kinesiology majors.""Fundamentals of tumbling and gymnastics apparatus. Skill enhancement, analysis, understanding practice and the development of progressions.""Fundamentals of indoor and outdoor team sports, for example basketball, volleyball, flag football, and soccer. Skill enhancement, analysis, understanding practice and the development of progressions.""Fundamentals of individual sports and fitness, for example disc golf, bowling, badminton, and weight training. Skill enhancement, analysis, understanding practice and the development of progressions.""Techniques of individual and group facilitation for initiatives involving outdoor adventure activity. Topics include ropes/challenge course events, activity presentation, and sequencing, safety techniques, preparation principles and new games philosophy. Participation is required in one weekend of fieldwork."Overview of the various disciplines and professions that comprise the field of Kinesiology (the study of human movement) and help students determine the career option that best fits their interests."Overview of ISU policies and procedures, academic advising operations, degree requirements, program of study planning, and campus resources.  Students will have out-of-class activities and work with faculty, staff and mentors to explore careers in Kinesiology and complete assignments related to identification & development of their skills and interests.  Department of Kinesiology students only.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Semester long course for new students in the Kinesiology Learning Community to be taken concurrently with the general orientation class for Kinesiology majors.  Students will take field trips and work with faculty, staff and mentors to explore careers in kinesiology and complete assignments related to identification & development of their skills and interests. Kinesiology and health majors only.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Development of personal fitness using a variety of conditioning and exercise techniques such as aerobics, weight training, and aquatic fitness. Introduction to acute and chronic responses to exercise, and the role of exercise in health promotion and weight management.   Credit for only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: KIN 163, 258.""Development of exercise leadership skills for a variety of activities.  Includes planning, promotion, and teaching techniques for developing fitness in others using a variety of exercise modalities including group fitness and weight training.  Kinesiology and health majors only.""This course is designed to enhance the student's current level of knowledge and expertise to an advanced level in the area of strength training and conditioning.  The course will prepare students interested in taking the National Strength and Conditioning Association Certified and Conditioning Specialist's exam.  The course will focus on the assessment and implementation of training programs with strong emphasis on the areas of resistance training, metabolic training, flexibility, reaction time, speed, and agility. Kinesiology and health majors only and permission of instructor needed.""Observing, planning, and facilitating movement experiences of children in an elementary school setting.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Observing, planning, and facilitating movement experiences of students in a public school setting.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Planning and facilitating physical education experiences for children in a community outreach setting.  Experiences take place on campus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Approaches to teaching movement skills, health-related fitness and school-based physical activities (in the classroom, in PE, during recess) to pre-school and elementary school age children are covered. Emphasis is placed on planning and conducting developmentally appropriate movement experiences for preschool and elementary aged children throughout the school day based upon educational psychology, exercise psychology and motor development research. Practical experience is provided.   Credit in only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: KIN 284, 312."Pre-internship experience with a health or fitness organization based on option.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Study under supervision of faculty.Planning for management and instruction of developmentally appropriate physical education for children pre-school through grade six. Laboratory experience required.   Credit for only one of KIN 284 or KIN 312 may be applied toward graduation."Current theory, practice and research on teaching focusing on management, instructional, and learning styles of students in secondary schools.""Study in the theory, ethics, strategy, and mechanics of coaching various interscholastic and/or intercollegiate sports. Emphasis on formulating a philosophy, identifying goals and psychological aspects, teaching skills, and developing strategies.""Application of management concepts to the fitness industry, e.g., understanding customers, marketing, program management, financial management, legal issues, and evaluation and planning.""Mechanical basis of human performance; application of mechanical principles to exercise, sport and other physical activities."Physiological basis of human performance; effects of physical activity on body functions."Sport and exercise as social systems and as institutions related to other institutions such as the polity, the economy, mass media, and education.""Understanding of human electrocardiography, including normal and abnormal 12-lead ECGs and arrhythmia identification.""Psychological factors that influence performance in sport settings.  The influence of personality, anxiety, motivation and social factors.  Psychological skills training and strategic methods for improvement of athletic performance."Psychological theories for understanding and predicting health-oriented exercise behavior. Psychological and psychobiological responses to exercise. Psychological interventions for increasing exercise participation and adherence rates."Introduction to major concepts of neuromotor control, behavioral motor control  and motor learning in the child, adult and older adult, with emphasis on the adult system."Search techniques and preparation of relevant material for work and/or professional school admission. Information specifically related to health care and kinesiology fields.  Field experience process and procedures will be reviewed."Applied service learning experiences designed to provide students with opportunities to apply classroom knowledge to real world applications.  Students will gain professional skills and programming experience while supporting health, education and wellness programming in school, work site or community settings.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Specific disabling conditions in terms of etiology, characteristics, needs, and potential for movement experiences. Techniques of assessment, prescription, adaptation of activities, methods, and program planning. Laboratory experience required.   KIN 595 may not be taken by students who have previously earned credit in KIN 395""The role of sport in developing fitness, recreational opportunities, and tourism, with special emphasis on issues related to youth sport, volunteerism, and the marketing of sport events and facilities."Supervised teaching in the secondary schools.Supervised teaching in the elementary schools."Students will understand legal concepts and terminology relevant to sport/activity, identify strategies for limiting liability in sport/fitness programs, and identify solutions for elimination of discriminatory practices in sport and physical activity.""Examination of biomechanics and kinesiology research literature to evaluate the application of mechanical principles and analyses to human movement in exercise, sport, physical activity, and activities of daily living and to assess research outcomes and their implications for motor performance, movement energetic, musculoskeletal loading, and injury."Principles of cardiac risk factor identification and modification; risk classification of potential exercise clients; fitness assessments; developing comprehensive exercise prescriptions for individuals.Observation and practice of exercise leadership techniques in an on-campus adult fitness program."The role of exercise in preventive medicine. Impact of exercise on various diseases, and the effect of various medical conditions on the ability to participate in vigorous exercise and competitive sports. Principles of exercise testing and prescription for individuals with these conditions. Environmental and nutritional aspects of exercise.""Advanced analysis of theoretical health behavior models and their application to physical activity behavior.  Includes practical techniques, tools and interventions (e.g., counseling skills, motivational interviewing) to enhance exercise prescription and motivation, and considerations for working with special populations.""Study of grading, assessment and evaluation in physical education with a focus on measuring cognitive and psycho-motor achievement.""Addresses the role of the central nervous system in the control of voluntary human movement, with the focus on the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia and cerebellum. Content organized around specific nervous system damage (such as stroke, apraxia, spasticity, or spinal cord damage) and functional movements (such as reaching and grasping, balance and gait). Converging evidence from human movement disorders, brain imaging, animal lesion and single cell studies provide the primary basis for the content.""Understanding the physiological, behavioral, and cognitive changes associated with aging with focus on the effects of physical activity on the aging human system.  Discussions of what it means to become older, what a person can expect during the aging process, and what kind of control a person has over the aging process.""Current theory, practices and principles applied to curriculum development for programs in physical education, K-12. Organizing for teaching in a variety of school settings.""The structure and function of human muscular, skeletal and nervous systems. The relationship of these systems to efficient and safe human motion."Learning lab techniques in Biomechanics and engaging in the experimental process.Learning lab techniques in Exercise Physiology and engaging in the experimental process.Learning lab techniques in Exercise Psychology and engaging in the experimental process.Learning lab techniques in Motor Control and engaging in the experimental process.Observation and practice in fitness agencies.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Observation and practice in selected exercise science agencies.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Observation and practice in selected sport and exercise science agencies.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Independent study of problems of areas of interest in exercise and sport science and related areas.Independent study of problems of areas of interest in exercise and sport science and related areas.Independent study of problems of areas of interest in exercise and sport science and related areas.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Methods and techniques used in the design and interpretation of research involving physical activity. Emphasis on styles of writing, library use, and computer applications.""Application and use of laboratory research equipment in exercise physiology, including operation, calibration, and use in selected situations.""The role of exercise in preventive medicine. Impact of exercise on various diseases, and the effect of various medical conditions on the ability to participate in vigorous exercise and competitive sports. Principles of exercise testing and prescription for individuals with these conditions."Planning for management and instruction of developmentally appropriate physical education for children pre-school through grade six.  Laboratory experience required.  Emphasis on evaluating published research on physical education and school-wide physical activity."Utilization of biomechanical principles to model injury mechanisms. Introduction to tissue mechanics of bone, articular cartilage, ligament, tendon, and muscle.  Biomechanics of lower extremity, upper extremity, and head/neck/trunk injuries."Application of the principles of mechanics to the analysis of human motion. Investigation of the effects of kinematics and kinetics on the human body with special emphasis on exercise and sport applications. Includes consideration of two-dimensional and three-dimensional imaging techniques and force measurements."Systematic problem-solving approaches and design of computer programs for biomechanical analyses.  Estimation of anthropometric parameters and mechanical properties of muscles, bones, and joints.  Integration of anthropometrics, kinematics, and muscle mechanics into simulations of human movement."Student teaching for 8 weeks in an elementary school.Student teaching for 8 weeks in a middle or high school."Sociological analysis of sport with emphasis on sociological theory, sports structure, and function in modern industrialized society; the systems of sport in regard to their role structure; formal organization, and professionalization and its differentiation along social class, age, and sex.""Aspects of psychology which form a basis for understanding and explaining behavior in the context of exercise and sport. Emphasis on evaluating published research, particularly theory and research methodology. Student presentations.""Overview of mammalian physiology. Cell biology, endocrinology, cardiovascular, respiratory, immune, digestive, skeletal muscle and reproductive systems.""Concepts and methods of assessing neurological, muscular, cardiovascular, and respiratory adjustments to exercise."Analysis of factors affecting work capacity and performance. Human energy metabolism concepts and measurement."Cardiovascular, renal, respiratory, and digestive physiology.""Physiological principles of physical fitness, design and administration of fitness programs; testing, evaluation, and prescription; electrocardiogram interpretation.""Theoretical perspectives of motor control and learning will be examined as well as factors that facilitate motor learning. Motor control and learning will also be addressed by studying functional tasks such as reach and grasp, posture and locomotor, handwriting, catching and/or speech.""Addresses theories and underlying mechanisms of motor development and motor control applied to typically and atypically developing children. Developmental control of balance, locomotion, reach-to-grasp, and other functional skills will be discussed, as will the role of physical activity in a child's life.""Advanced analysis of theoretical health behavior models and their application to physical activity behavior.  Includes practical techniques, tools and interventions (e.g., counseling skills, motivational interviewing) to enhance exercise prescription and motivation, and considerations for working with special populations."This course will cover the broad scope of research in physical activity and public health.  Emphasis will be placed on the application of physical activity assessment techniques since accurate measures are needed to more accurately assess the health benefits from physical activity and to evaluate the effectiveness of behavioral interventions designed to promote physical activity."Study of grading, assessment and evaluation in physical education with a focus on measuring cognitive and psycho-motor achievement.""Addresses the role of the central nervous system in the control of voluntary human movement, with the focus on the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia and cerebellum. Content organized around specific nervous system damage (such as stroke, apraxia, spasticity, or spinal cord damage) and functional movements (such as reaching and grasping, balance and gait). Converging evidence from human movement disorders, brain imaging, animal lesion and single cell studies provide the primary basis for the content.""Current theory, practices and principles applied to curriculum development for programs in physical education, K-12. Organizing for teaching in a variety of school settings."Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas."Supervised experience with teaching an upper division, classroom-based course.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Specific disabling conditions in terms of etiology, characteristics, needs, and potential for movement experiences. Techniques of assessment, prescription, adaptation of activities, methods, and program planning. Laboratory experience required.   KIN 595 may not be taken by students who have previously earned credit in KIN 395"Culminating seminar designed to synthesize statistical and design courses with practical research issues using data from physical activity."Reading and representing varied landscapes; development of aesthetic sensitivity to the geomorphology, vegetation, and cultural influences on these landscapes. Small-scale interventions and exploration of landscape phenomena and change. Emphasis on a variety of documentation and drawing techniques.""Fundamental issues of landscape planning and design at a site scale. Projects introduce a variety of (objective and subjective) site inquiry methods, space and place making, and sensitive integration of architecture and landscape for specific land uses. User needs, precedent study, programming, site engineering, planting design, and outdoor space design expressed through a variety of three-dimensional modeling, graphic, and written media.""Introduction of computer applications and standards used by landscape architects and other design professions and their place in a replicable work flow. Foundational knowledge and basic skills in a range of industry-standard 2D, 3D, and 4D computer applications used for design development and communication.""Observation and study of the wetland, prairie, and woodland vegetation native to the savanna ecotone. Emphasis on plant communities, their distribution, structure, habitat and aesthetics. Plant identification and use in landscape design. Precedent and case studies of vegetation preservation, restoration and use in built works.""Identification, observation, and study of plants introduced to cultivation in the Midwest region.  Plant cultural requirements, including adaptations to climate changes, solar exposure, and soil conditions.  Investigation of history of plant introduction and use in designed landscape, including consequent impacts of plant introduction such as plant invasion.  Introduction to planting design at the site scale, including matching plant cultural requirements to site conditions, functional uses of plants and expressive composition using plant form, texture and color.""Development of life skills for conflict resolution, effective interpersonal communication, and CPR/First Aid. Examination of personal values as they relate to the backgrounds, abilities, attitudes, and   values of others; exploration of how these influence personal decision-making and group interaction. Reading, discussion, class   activities, journal-keeping, writing.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""The development of natural resource conservation philosophy and policy from the Colonial Era to the present. North American wildlife, forestry, and environmental policy; national parks and other protected lands; federal and state agencies.  Relationship to cultural contexts, including urban reform and American planning movement. Discussion of common pool resources, public and private lands.""Exploration of cultural landscapes, from broad settlement patterns to individual sites, with an emphasis on the origins and evolution of landscapes. Investigation of relationships between vernacular and designed landscapes. Landscapes considered as modes of cultural production that shape and are shaped by social, political, and economic processes. Exploration of landscapes as persistent (yet ephemeral) repositories of culture. Lectures, reading, field studies, and writing.""Exploration of social and behavioral factors pertinent to design of the domestic, civic, and commercial landscape. Focus on working familiarity with design principles as they relate to the behavior and activities of people across a broad demographic and cultural spectrum; application of these principles to design of outdoor environments. Lectures and discussions, including group exercises and field trips.""Exploration of the poetics and principles of landscape construction. Investigation and interpretation of landform and geomorphic processes such as the hydrologic cycle, erosion, and sedimentation. Close observation and representation of detail design, with an emphasis on material types, their connections, and weathering. Readings, field studies, and drawings in analog and digital media.""Understand design implications presented by geotechnical and ecological processes in the landscape including ecology, vegetation, soils and water. Understand the influence of landforms, geology, plants, soils, and water on the creation of landscape designs. Course relates current issues including water quality impairment, erosion, and invasive species with design strategies such as stormwater management, soil quality management, and plant community restoration. Field trips.""Development of half-acre to hundred-acre landscape design and planning proposals, potentially in collaboration with students in other programs. Apply critical methodological frameworks to shape site systems while providing appropriate support for diverse user groups and creating culturally meaningful places. Assess and interpret a program of use, organize subjective and objective site inventory and analysis, develop functional and poetic design strategies for infrastructure and natural systems, and craft artistic and functionally explicit landscape architectural proposals. Development of appropriate technique and high level of craft in representations to support design thinking process and final scheme presentation.""Application of ecological theories and processes in design and planning at the hundred plus-acre scale specifically focusing on urban and urban fringe landscapes. Apply advanced landscape analysis of soil, water, and vegetation utilizing geographic information systems. Particular focus on stream and wetland restoration, mitigation, and regulations and developing design representations for public use.""Observation of and reflection on professional practice and landscapes in urban, rural, and wilderness areas.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""The art and techniques of creating plant compositions in the landscape that respond to cultural and biophysical contexts. Investigation of soil properties and plant/soil relationships relevant to the built environment.  Methods of site inventory and analysis, developing plant palettes and composing plant assemblages that address expressive and functional needs.  Introduction to the techniques of preparing planting plans, including standards for plant selection, plant lists and plant specification.""Exploration of contemporary landscape architectural practice through individualized research into practicing firms. Preparation of paper and presentation outlining broad framework and specific parameters of a selected area of contemporary practice using specific projects as examples. Work may result in invitation of current practitioner(s) as a lecture series or event. Resume and portfolio preparation in advance of required off-campus semester (L A 444 A, B or C).""Investigation of landscape design concepts and trends as observed over time, from approximately 1750 to the present, with emphasis on the United States and Europe. Examination of significant figures and outstanding works (sites, gardens, landscapes, monuments, subdivisions, city plans, etc.) of varied geographic regions. Analysis of the social, economic, political, and technical   forces contributing to the development of landscape design styles, vocabulary, and literature. Lectures, readings, projects, research papers.""Investigation of international landscape design concepts and trends as observed over time, from pre-history to the mid 18th century. Examination of significant figures and outstanding works (sites, gardens, landscapes, monuments, subdivisions, city plans, etc.) of varied geographic regions. Analysis of the social, economic, political, and technical forces contributing to the development of landscape design styles, vocabulary, and literature. Lectures, readings, projects, research papers.""Design of landforms to achieve aesthetic, functional, and safety goals. Landform changes to accommodate human uses and activities. Impacts and implications of landform transformation on the surrounding environment. Surface and subsurface drainage design, storm water runoff best management practices, contour manipulation to incorporate slopes, swales, culverts, pads, retaining walls, walks, steps, terraces, buildings, and other structures in the landscape. Road layout and alignment, parking lot design, and earthwork volume estimates. Design communication using CAD, perspectives, cross-sections, contour maps, landform models, and narratives. Class exercises, case study precedents, and preliminary construction documents.""Physical planning and design of places utilizing community-based methods. Projects address social and cultural dimensions of placemaking such as reuse of abandoned sites, in-fill development, and community visioning. Emphasis on development of user-client relationship skills and design research. Integrated seminar component.""Physical planning and design of places utilizing community-based methods. Projects address social and cultural dimensions of placemaking such as reuse of abandoned sites, in-fill development, and community visioning. Emphasis on development of user-client relationship skills and design research. Integrated seminar component.""Comprehensive planning and design for urban sites or for sites within urban contexts. Projects typically include planning for a variety of integrated land uses, and cover the full range of design scales from master planning to proposals for site details. Emphasis on written and verbal as well as graphic communications. Integrated seminar component.""Comprehensive planning and design for urban sites or for sites within urban contexts. Projects typically include planning for a variety of integrated land uses, and cover the full range of design scales from master planning to proposals for site details. Emphasis on written and verbal as well as graphic communications. Integrated seminar component."Preparation for senior thesis.Advanced forum for the demonstration of sophistication in landscape architectural design. Experimentation and innovation are encouraged.Advanced forum for the demonstration of sophistication in landscape architectural design. Experimentation and innovation are encouraged.Individual advanced forum for the demonstration of sophistication in landscape architectural design. Experimentation and innovation are expected."Assessment and reduction of impacts in urban and peri-urban watershed areas. Course prepares students to work with various analysis methods for vegetation, topography, stormwater and stream condition as well as work with data from other disciplines. Emphasis on communicating with the public. Introductory GIS and GPS technologies are utilized. Learning is largely field-based.""Theory and practice of planting design, with emphasis on the ecological, cultural, and aesthetic factors affecting planting design and vegetation management in the built environment. Research, case studies, and design projects.""Studies of conventional and developing forms of public and private practice. Explore relationships between professional life and the culture of the professional design firm; investigate firm identities and structures; understand design projects, their delivery process, and contractual agreements. Lecture and class discussion.""Independent educational enrichment through exploration of landscape architectural practice in a professional internship, international studies, or out-of-region national study experience.""Independent educational enrichment through exploration of landscape architectural practice in a professional internship, international studies, or out-of-region national study experience.""Independent educational enrichment through exploration of landscape architectural practice in a professional internship, international studies, or out-of-region national study experience.""Independent educational enrichment through exploration of landscape architectural practice in a professional internship, international studies, or out-of-region national study experience.""Exploration of computational representation of the landscape palette.  Geometric parameters for terrain, vegetation, water, weather and lighting effects are modeled and developed algorithmically. Basic computer programming logic and computer graphics interactivity are combined to produce stand-alone software application prototypes that address core landscape design principles.""Descriptive and predictive GIS modeling techniques, spatial statistics, and map algebra. Application of GIS   modeling techniques to environmental planning and resource management."Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections. Course contact hours can range from (2-0) to (3-0) depending on number of credits.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections.Offerings vary with each term; check with department for available sections."Development of construction details with emphasis on materials and their aesthetic and functional uses as building materials.  Explore characteristics and uses of construction materials and application of wood systems, paving systems, retaining walls, masonry and concrete systems, and metals; investigate structural theory of wood systems. Preliminary preparation of construction documents.""Advanced site construction issues, with emphasis on water and irrigation systems, mechanical and electrical systems, site lighting, proposal preparation, project scheduling, project costing and estimating, and master specification editing."Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student.Investigation of a topic of special interest to the student."Environmental law and policy as applied in planning at the local and state levels. Brownfields, environmental justice, water quality, air quality, wetland and floodplain management, and local government involvement in ecological protection through land use planning and other programs.""Graduate studio in landscape architectural design working on complex sites involving multiple scales of design. Course emphasizes advanced skills in design research and representation and application of theory, as well as technical competency and teamwork. Development of original ideas, experimentation, and innovation.""Assessment and reduction of impacts in urban and peri-urban watershed areas. Course prepares students to work with various analysis methods for vegetation, topography, stormwater and stream condition as well as work with data from other disciplines. Emphasis on communicating with the public. Introductory GIS and GPS technologies are utilized. Learning is largely field-based.""Theory and practice of planting design, with emphasis on the ecological, cultural, and aesthetic factors affecting planting design and vegetation management in the built environment. Research, case studies, and design projects.""Planting design and emergent technologies for design performance in the urban built environment. Emphasis on innovative strategies for planting design and plant technology in building design, sustainable streetscapes, and urban systems integrating storm water and urban Ì¢‰âÂÅÒhardscapeÌ¢‰âÂåù design. Interviews with practitioners, technical experts and agency program leaders will complement readings, lecture and site visits to exemplary project sites.""Examination of design inquiry and research methods appropriate to landscape architectural projects, including bibliographical, historical, numerical, statistical, survey, and geographical methods. Readings, discussions, and application problems. Preparation of a research proposal.""Application of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) modeling techniques to landscape planning and management issues. Selection, acquisition, and conversion of digital landscape data. Modeling applications for studio projects, outreach projects, and research projects.""Examination of the development of ideas in landscape architecture in their historical context of social practices and knowledge systems. Emphasis on exposure to key modern and contemporary texts and projects in landscape architecture, architecture, art, and related fields. Readings, discussions, and writings.""Exploration of major theories and emerging practices of landscape architectural design and their relationships to broader, cultural and theoretical perspectives. Emphasis on developing critical ways of analyzing ideas. Lectures, readings, discussion, and writings."Hands-on participation in a creative or research activity in the student's area of specialization. Development of a detailed prospectus that defines the thesis or creative component."Environmental law and policy as applied in planning at the local and state levels. Brownfields, environmental justice, water quality, air quality, wetland and floodplain management, and local government involvement in ecological protection through land use planning and other programs."Comprehensive study and original development of a project selected by the student and approved by the major professor. Completed project must be submitted to and approved by a graduate faculty committee as evidence of mastery of the principles of landscape architecture."Grammar and vocabulary of classical Latin, within the context of Roman culture; reading knowledge through texts adapted from classical authors.""Grammar and vocabulary of classical Latin, within the context of Roman culture; reading knowledge through texts adapted from classical authors.""Emphasis on grammatical principles, composition and reading Latin texts.""Readings in Latin Literature with emphasis on critical analysis of style, structure or thought.""Designed to meet the needs of students who seek work in areas other than those in which courses are offered, or who desire to integrate a study of literature or language with special problems in major fields.   No more than 9 credits in Latin 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Designed for emerging student leaders, this course will provide students with basic leadership skills covering strengths identification, personal skills development, goal achievement, values-based behaviors, and mission statement development."Theory and practice of effective leadership in a campus context. Study of effective leadership models and leadership in complex systems. Expectation of engagement in campus activities.Special projects for the Leadership Studies program."Developing and practicing leadership skills through understanding personal leadership styles, leadership theory and communication theory, including how they relate to gender issues and cultural diversity; exploring personality types, communication styles, and leadership styles, networking and developing mentoring relationships; setting goals and participating in leadership opportunities and service.""This course will examine historical and contemporary barriers to and opportunities for women's leadership in a variety of contexts, including professions and public service. It will examine theories of women's leadership, gender differences in leadership styles, and the perceptions and expectations about women's leadership. Multiple perspectives of women's leadership will be highlighted through lectures, readings, videos, guest speakers and group work.""Critical analysis of leadership theory to inform practice, with emphasis on ethical leadership and the alignment of personal and organizational values.""Research on women and leadership in selected content areas (e.g., business, education, politics and public service, and popular culture). Following an overview of quantitative and qualitative methods and critical analyses of journal articles on women and leadership, students will work in groups in selected content areas to research, write and present paper."Independent study for the Leadership Studies program.   No more than 6 credits of LD ST 490 may count toward graduation."Introduction to developing intentional learners and worthy team members. Learning as the foundation of human enterprise; intellectual curiosity; ethics as a personal responsibility; everyday leadership; effective team and community interactions including team learning and the effects on individuals; and growth through understanding self, demonstrating ownership of own learning, and internalizing commitment to helping others. Intentional mental processing as a means of enhancing learning. Interconnectedness of the individual, the community, and the world."Focus on team and community. Application of fundamentals of human learning; evidence of development as a responsible learner; intentional mental processing as a habit of mind; planning and facilitating learning opportunities for others; responsibility of the individual to the community and the world; leading from within; holding self and others accountable for growth and development as learners and leaders."Application of theories about habits of mind, mindset, and critical thinking to structured cross-disciplinary problem-solving scenarios. Development and utilization of personal and team action plans for specific habits of mind associated with leadership."Transfer of theories about learning and leadership to practice. Leading for change. Using knowledge of self and interactive skills to explore interdependence. Development of an action plan that addresses a real-world problem."Teamwork in a practicum to execute a project that will positively change the community.  Application of learning and leadership theory: framing a problem, justifying approaches, taking action, getting feedback, and planning new actions.  Application to be accompanied by continual reflection and feedback.  Development of final portfolio to showcase cumulative leadership growth in the Learning and Leadership Sciences minor.""Introduction to all undergraduate colleges. Provides information about university resources and services, assists with a successful academic transition to the university, and helps initiate the process of identifying academic major(s) and eventual career paths.  Required of all first-year students in Open Option and Preprofessional Programs.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Learning Community/ Seminar focusing entirely on the ""cutting edge"" research activities of faculty members.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of three total credits of LAS 103A, 103B, 103C, 103D, 103E can count for graduation.""Learning Community/ Seminar focusing entirely on the ""cutting edge"" research activities of faculty members.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of three total credits of LAS 103A, 103B, 103C, 103D, 103E can count for graduation.""Learning Community/ Seminar focusing entirely on the ""cutting edge"" research activities of faculty members.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of three total credits of LAS 103A, 103B, 103C, 103D, 103E can count for graduation.""Learning Community/ Seminar focusing entirely on the ""cutting edge"" research activities of faculty members.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of three total credits of LAS 103A, 103B, 103C, 103D, 103E can count for graduation.""Learning Community/ Seminar focusing entirely on the ""cutting edge"" research activities of faculty members.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of three total credits of LAS 103A, 103B, 103C, 103D, 103E can count for graduation.""Learning Community/ Seminar focusing entirely on the ""cutting edge"" research activities of faculty members.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  A maximum of three total credits of LAS 103A, 103B, 103C, 103D, 103E can count for graduation.""Links a large lecture class with a small learning community / seminar.  In each case the professor teaching the large lecture facilitates a small weekly seminar.  Informal discussions about critical issues of the day connected to lecture topics through films, public lectures and other events which students and the faculty leader attend.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Links a large lecture class with a small learning community / seminar.  In each case the professor teaching the large lecture facilitates a small weekly seminar.  Informal discussions about critical issues of the day connected to lecture topics through films, public lectures and other events which students and the faculty leader attend.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Links a large lecture class with a small learning community / seminar.  In each case the professor teaching the large lecture facilitates a small weekly seminar.  Informal discussions about critical issues of the day connected to lecture topics through films, public lectures and other events which students and the faculty leader attend.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Links a large lecture class with a small learning community / seminar.  In each case the professor teaching the large lecture facilitates a small weekly seminar.  Informal discussions about critical issues of the day connected to lecture topics through films, public lectures and other events which students and the faculty leader attend.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Links a large lecture class with a small learning community / seminar.  In each case the professor teaching the large lecture facilitates a small weekly seminar.  Informal discussions about critical issues of the day connected to lecture topics through films, public lectures and other events which students and the faculty leader attend.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Links a large lecture class with a small learning community / seminar.  In each case the professor teaching the large lecture facilitates a small weekly seminar.  Informal discussions about critical issues of the day connected to lecture topics through films, public lectures and other events which students and the faculty leader attend.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Beginning to study leadership through applied examples, including the importance of community, communication, trust, shared responsibility, modeling the way, and inspiring a shared vision. Students will be introduced to campus leadership opportunities.""Continuing to study leadership through applied examples, including the importance of challenging the process, enabling others to act, and encouraging the heart. Students will engage more deeply in campus leadership opportunities.""Service work as appropriate to the student s degree program. Academic work under faculty supervision may include written project, report, and guided reading.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Service work as appropriate to the student s degree program. Academic work under faculty supervision may include written project, report, and guided reading.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Service work as appropriate to the student s degree program. Academic work under faculty supervision may include written project, report, and guided reading.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Service work as appropriate to the student s degree program. Academic work under faculty supervision may include written project, report, and guided reading.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Students participating in an internship or co-op on a full-time basis must register for this course prior to beginning their work experience to remain in full-time student status.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."An examination of the religious, social, scientific, and historical contexts for the Nazi destruction of European Jewry. Topics covered include anti-Semitism, German volkish philosophy, eugenics, World War II, the Final Solution, rescuers, and contemporary issues."Students participating in an internship or co-op on a full-time basis must register for this course prior to beginning their work experience to remain in full-time student status.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.No more than 9 credits of LAS 490 may be applied toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of LAS 490 may be applied toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of LAS 490 may be applied toward graduation."Service work as appropriate to the student's degree program. Academic work under faculty supervision may include written project, report, and guided reading.""Service work as appropriate to the student's degree program. Academic work under faculty supervision may include written project, report, and guided reading.""Service work as appropriate to the student's degree program. Academic work under faculty supervision may include written project, report, and guided reading.""Service work as appropriate to the student's degree program. Academic work under faculty supervision may include written project, report, and guided reading."Students participating in an internship or co-op on a full-time basis must register for this course prior to beginning their work experience to remain in full-time student status.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Semester-long internship appropriate to the student's degree program. Must include an academic component under faculty supervision such as written projects, reports, and guided reading. Students must register for this course prior to beginning their internship.""Eight-week course required for undergraduate degree. Provides a solid understanding of information literacy and the research process with emphases on finding, evaluating, and using scholarly information; the ethical and legal framework related to information use; and utilization of library discovery tools. To be taken as early as possible in the student's undergraduate career. See course descriptions of ENGL 150 and ENGL 250 for requirements related to LIB 160.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Cross-disciplinary perspectives on the study of linguistics.  Applications of linguistics to real world problems.  Careers in linguistics."Study of language diversity and the personal, social and political effects of diversity. Language families, attitudes toward language and language use, language and culture, multilingualism, foreign language learning, written codes, official languages, and language policy."Introduction to the use of linguistic knowledge in computer applications today and the basic computational techniques used in such applications.  The development of these techniques throughout the history of computational linguistics.  How the study of language has contributed to the advancement of technology and how certain computational problems have influenced the way linguists study language.Introduction to fundamental logical concepts and logical symbolism. Development of natural deduction through first order predicate logic with identity. Applications to arguments in ordinary English and to philosophical issues. Linguistics majors should take LING/PHIL 207 as early as possible."Introduction to linguistic concepts and principles of linguistic analysis with English as the primary source of data. Sound and writing systems, sentence structure, vocabulary, and meaning. Issues in the study of usage, regional and social dialects, language acquisition, and language change.""Overview of grammatical structures and functions. Parts of speech; phrase, clause, and sentence structure; sentence types and sentence analysis; rhetorical grammar and sentence style; terminology. Not a remedial, English composition, or ESL course.""Survey of nature, causes, and types of major communication disorders including phonological, adult and child language, voice, cleft palate, fluency, and hearing disorders.""Learn to communicate with the deaf using Signed English and Signed Pidgin English.  Other topics covered include types, causes, and consequences of hearing loss, hearing technology (hearing aids, assistive listening devices, and cochlear implants), education of hearing-impaired children, Deaf culture, and the history of manual communication.""The study of symbolic processes and how meaning is conveyed in words, sentences, and utterances; discussion of modern theories of meaning; and an exploration of relationships among language, thought and action.""Introduction to study of language, culture and society from an anthropological perspective. Focus on language and thought,   ethnography of speaking, discourse and narrative, writing and literacy, and media communication. Discussion of key theories and   methods of linguistic anthropology.""Models of computation: finite state automata, pushdown automata and Turing machines. Study of grammars and their relation to automata. Limits of digital computation, unsolvability and Church-Turing thesis. Chomsky hierarchy and relations between classes of languages.""Introduction to the theory, methods, techniques, and problems of translation. Consideration of material from business, literature, and the social sciences. Taught in Spanish.""An introductory study of the articulation, classification, distribution, and regional variations of the sounds of the Spanish language. Taught in Spanish.""Introduction to the theory, methods, techniques, and problems of consecutive and simultaneous interpretation.  Consideration of material from business, agriculture, law, design, medicine, literature, advertisement, and sports. Taught in Spanish.""Analysis of speech through study of individual sounds, their variations, and relationships in context; English phonology; practice in auditory discrimination and transcription of sounds of American English; description of speech sounds in terms of their production, transmission, and perception.""Introduction to psycholinguistics. Topics may include origin of language, speech perception, language comprehension, reading, bilingualism, brain bases of language, and computational modeling of language processes.""Comparison of English to other languages by family background and by type.  Analysis of representative Old, Middle, Early Modern   and present-day English texts, including both literary works and non-literary documents."The ways men and women differ in using language in varied settings and the ways in which language both creates and reflects gender divisions.The process of second language learning and principles and techniques of teaching second languages. Learning and teaching in specific situations and for particular purposes. Current applications of technology in teaching and assessment.Theories and methods for analysis of syntax and morphology.Linguistic study of the major differences between the Spanish and English grammatical systems and their applications in the translation of Spanish to English. Taught in Spanish."Intensive study of the phonology, morphosyntax and lexicon of the Hispanic dialects of Spain and Latin America in their historical context. Taught in Spanish.""Theories and developmental processes related to the components of language(semantics, syntax, morphology, phonology, and pragmatics); the development of metalinguistic knowledge; theories and developmental processes of reading."Guided examination of topics in preparation for graduate work in Speech-Language Pathology or Audiology. Primary course delivery by WWW.Guided examination of topics in preparation for graduate work in Speech-Language Pathology or Audiology. Primary course delivery by WWW.Guided examination of topics in preparation for graduate work in Speech-Language Pathology or Audiology. Primary course delivery by WWW."Planning, implementation, and assessment of standards-based, student-centered, and thematic instruction in the elementary (K-8) classroom.  Special emphasis on K-8 students' communicative skills, cultural knowledge, and content learning."Designed to meet the needs of students who wish to study in areas other than those in which courses are offered.   No more than 9 credits of ENGL 490 may be used toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of Anthr 490 may be counted toward graduation."Use of software and web applications for language teaching, linguistic analysis, and statistical analysis. Issues and problems in applied linguistics related to computer methods.""Principles and methods of linguistic analysis with emphasis on phonology, morphology, and syntax. Description of linguistic variation and current theoretical approaches to linguistics.""Theory, methods, and results of second language acquisition research with emphasis on approaches relevant to second language teaching."Advanced practicum in language assessment."Theories and methods of examining language in its social setting. Analysis of individual characteristics (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity, social class, region), interactional factors (e.g., situation, topic, purpose) and national policies affecting language use.""Introduction to computational techniques involving human language and speech in applications such as information retrieval and extraction, automatic text categorization, word prediction, intelligent Web searching, spelling and grammar checking, speech recognition and synthesis, statistical machine translation, n-grams, POS-tagging, word-sense disambiguation, on-line lexicons and thesauri, markup languages, corpus analysis, and Python programming language.""Introduction to approaches, methods, techniques, materials, curricular design, and assessment for various levels of ESL instruction. Attention to issues related to the teaching of listening, speaking, reading, writing, vocabulary, pronunciation, and culture.""Principles of second language assessment including reliability, validity, authenticity and practicality. Constructing, scoring,   interpreting, and evaluating second language tests for a variety of situations."Concepts and practices for analysis of English by computer with emphasis on the applications of computational analysis to problems   in applied linguistics such as corpus analysis and recognition of learner language in computer-assisted learning and language   assessment."Theoretical and practical issues and techniques in the teaching of literacy in a variety of contexts, involving children and adults at basic skill levels and teens and adults in academic and vocational programs.""Theoretical and practical issues and techniques in the teaching of second language pronunciation, listening, and speaking skills. Topics will be relevant to those intending to teach in various contexts involving both K-12 and adult learners.""Theory, research, and practice in computer use for teaching nonnative speakers of English. Methods for planning and evaluating computer-based learning activities.""Methods and theoretical foundations for linguistic approaches to discourse analysis. Applications of discourse analysis to the study of texts in a variety of settings, including academic and research contexts.""Issues and techniques in analyzing, teaching, and assessing English for specific purposes. Topics include theories of specific purpose language use, analysis of learner needs in target language contexts, and corpus-informed syllabus and materials development for teaching and assessment.""Corpus-informed analysis of syntax in authentic writing and speech, with emphasis on approaches used in applied linguistics: rationalist, empirical, functional, cognitive, and pedagogical.""Introduction to the theory, methods, techniques, and problems of consecutive and simultaneous interpretation.  Consideration of material from business, agriculture, law, design, medicine, literature, advertisement, and sports. Taught in Spanish."Intensive observation of ESL instruction and supervised practice in teaching learners of English in a context appropriate to the student teacher's goals.   ENGL 588 cannot be used for teacher licensure and cannot be taken during student teaching."Intensive study of applied linguistic theory as it relates to specific issues in language acquisition, teaching, or use.""Survey of research traditions in applied linguistics. Focus on theoretical and practical aspects of quantitative and qualitative approaches to applied linguistic study, including experimental and quasiexperimental methods, classroom observation and research, introspective methods, elicitation techniques, case studies, interactional analysis, ethnography, and program evaluation. Computational tools and resources for linguistic research will be highlighted."Principles and practice for the use and study of computers and the Internet in second language assessment."Topic changes each semester. Topics include advanced methods in natural language processing, technology and literacy in a global context, feedback in CALL programs, technology and pronunciation, and advances in language assessment.""Focus on integrating theoretical knowledge with practical expertise. Assess client needs; develop, integrate, and evaluate solutions.   Practical understanding of computer applications used in multimedia development. Create web-based or CD-ROM-based   multimedia materials. Work with advanced authoring applications.""An introduction to computer programming using an object-oriented programming language. Emphasis on the basics of good programming techniques and style. Extensive practice in designing, implementing, and debugging small programs. Use of abstract data types. Interactive and file I/O. Exceptions/error-handling. This course is not designed for computer science, software engineering, and computer engineering majors.   Credit may not be applied toward graduation for both Com S 207/MIS 207 and Com S 227.""The role of information technology in organizations. Overview of methodologies for design and development of systems including decision support systems, expert systems, data bases, end-user computing, etc. Computer applications relate concepts to practice. Lecture and laboratory work emphasizes the enabling role of IT in contemporary organizations.""Introduction to the concepts and use of data structures, file accesses and object oriented programming methodologies in contemporary business environments. Application development environments will be covered.""Critical analysis of business processes, data and process modeling, feasibility studies, CASE tools, and developing system design specifications.""Database design, development, and implementation. Focus on data models, both classical and object oriented. Uses relational and/or object oriented database management systems.""Equips students to support team activities in the general project management environment and better manage their careers. Practical experience using project management techniques and tools. Course topics include project initiation and execution, risk assessment, estimating and contracts, planning, human factors, and standard methods.""Advanced software development and topics in contemporary programming languages. Topics include basic syntax, advanced programming techniques, file structures and management, database access, algorithm design, web forms and graphical user interfaces.""Overview of business strategies and technologies used for electronic commerce. Emphasis is on the strategic, operational, and technical issues associated with global electronic commerce using class lecture/discussion and case studies.""Overview of Internet and telecommunications technology used in business applications. Understand Internet and network protocols, network and application architectures, design, and implementation.""Introduction to the field of business analytics (BA). Students will examine BA processes and techniques used in transforming data to knowledge and creating value for organizations. Business cases, presentations by business professionals, class lectures and discussions on data analysis, design and modeling, and extensive hands-on analytical exercises.""A variety of topics will be covered and topics may vary between semesters. Some of the topics are information resources management, electronic commerce, decision support systems, and expert systems.""Internal and inter-organizational information systems necessary for a supply chain to achieve competitive advantage. Topics include: design, development, implementation, and maintenance of supply chain information systems; enterprise resource planning; advanced planning and scheduling, manufacturing execution systems; and the interface between manufacturing planning and control processes, logistics processes, and the information system.""Contemporary theories, concepts, and practices in network infrastructure, network design, and information security. Design, install, and administer a complex network infrastructure. Study security threats and attacks and countermeasures. Investigate exposure to attacks, firewalls, and development of intrusion detection systems. Other security topics such as risk management, IT audit, and security regulations will also be addressed.""Projects-based course which provides an in-depth understanding of BA methods of visualization, data mining, text mining, web-mining, and predictions through the use of specific BA tools. For students who are interested in understanding advanced techniques and applications of data analytics and acquiring hands-on skills for making intelligent business decisions in data-rich organizations.""Design of business systems using contemporary tools and methods such as SQL, CASE tools, OOD tools, etc. Focuses on synthesizing concepts from earlier MIS courses."Examination of the role of enterprise resource planning systems (ERP) in the supply chain. Hands-on experience with a major software application in use by many corporations to manage and improve the efficiency of their supply chains and operations. Students will develop a more process-centric perspective about how a supply chain operates and how ERP enables and supports such operations.Students explore different practical scenarios related information systems projects and cases. Students acquire necessary skills and knowledge to solve practical issues associated with presented cases and problems. Students compete at different venues around the country."This course exposes the student to current theories and practices appropriate for understanding the role and application of information systems for individuals, organizations, and society within a globally competitive context.  The course focuses on information technology and its uses in improving work practices, products, and tools for individuals and organizations. The course also addresses issues pertaining to current and emerging topics in the development and use of technology, the role of technology in and its alignment with organizational strategy and sustainable business practices, information system planning and the development of enterprise architectures, and human interface and personal characteristics in the design and use of technology."A survey of business-oriented programming languages with emphasis on state-of-the-art development techniques for business software. Topics include object-oriented and Internet programming issues and methods."Addresses data needs of functions such as marketing, finance, and production. Advanced skills needed to design, develop and use database, data warehousing and data mining systems for effective decision support. Emphasis on importance of contemporary technologies."Overview of how modern communication technologies including the internet and world wide web have revolutionized the way we do business. Provides an understanding of various internet technologies and how companies are using the internet for commercial purposes. Explores future scenarios on the use of these technologies and their impact on various industries and the society."Issues involved in the management of telecommunications function. Overview of communications technology used in various business applications, local area network, wide area network, broad band network, wireless and voice networks. Internet technologies and protocols. Analyzing the strategic impact of these technologies on organizations. Strategic planning for telecommunications, including network planning and analysis.""Prepares students to support team activities in the general project management environment and provides them with a working understanding of the full scope of project management activities.  Students will also have practical experience using project management techniques and tools. Course topics include project initiation and execution, risk assessment, estimating and contracts, planning, human factors, and standard methods.  The course follows the recommended content areas of the Project Management Institute, and provides students with a recognized foundational training in project management.""Examine current and historical perspectives on business process management. Topics include process identification, mapping, and improvement. Additional topics will address business process automation and integration, business process outsourcing. Investigate current and potential tools and methods for business process management. Include process management projects.""A variety of topics may be offered in different semesters. Topics may include electronic commerce, information resources management, decision support systems, and expert systems."For students wishing to do individual research in a particular area of MIS.Examines issues such as the nature and content of information systems research; aspects of starting and pursuing research topics in information systems; exploring and understanding relevant research methods and tools. Develop preliminary research proposals.Preparation and writing of creative component."The state of behavioral research in the IS function.  MIS activities in an organization span the following three major areas: design and implementation of the MIS, use of the MIS, and management of the MIS function.  Each of these processes is carried out at several levels: individual, group, organizational and inter-organizational.  Identify behavioral issues of relevance for the cells defined by the process and level dimensions. Reading and discussion of the research literature surrounding the development, use, and implications of information technology.""Three fundamental areas of Information Systems, namely, infrastructure, management, and processes. Infrastructure studies examine the IT architecture including computing, communication, data, and application. Management focuses on addressing the value added notion of IT. Finally processing addresses topics related to enabling role of IT in myriad of areas.""Strategic issues in IT management.  Address issues such as aligning IT strategy with corporate strategy and functional strategies, IT structure, valuation, governance and control, and related topics.  Provide students with research skills related to the boundary between IT and the firm's external environment.""Research issues in the emerging areas of collaboration, knowledge management, and enterprise intelligence. Topics will include emerging and contemporary technologies of Data Mining, Knowledge Discovery from Databases, Web Mining, organizational memory, and knowledge management."Preparation of a research manuscript to be submitted to a peer-reviewed academic journal. Students will work with a faculty mentor on a research project."Preparation of a second research manuscript to be submitted to a peer-reviewed academic journal. Although students work under the supervision of a faculty mentor, the students will take independent responsibility for the research project.""Examine opportunities and implications of information technologies and human computer interaction on social and organizational systems. Explore ethical and social issues appurtenant to human computer interaction, both from a proscriptive and prescriptive perspective. Develop informed perspective on human computer interaction. Implications on research and development programs."Research."Review of the entrepreneurial process with emphasis on starting a new business. How to analyze opportunities, develop an innovative product, organize, finance, market, launch, and manage a new venture. Deals with the role of the entrepreneur and the importance of a business plan. Speakers and field project.""Developing an idea for a new business venture, conducting a feasibility study, researching the potential market, analyzing the competition, and writing a formal business plan. Basic business functions are discussed in terms of their application to conducting feasibility analysis and writing a business plan for an entrepreneurial venture.""The essentials of operating an entrepreneurial firm in an international environment. Topics include understanding the role of entrepreneurship in economic development, starting and developing a business in an international market, financing international ventures, international management issues and exchange rates.""A management functions approach is used to explain what managers do in organizations; how they deal with external constituents, how they structure their companies, and how they deal with employees. A contingency approach is used as a framework for understanding how to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of organizations in today's dynamic, highly competitive business environment.""The study of individual attributes, interpersonal relations, and employee attitudes in organizations. Instructional emphasis is placed on how management concepts such as reward systems, job design, leadership, teams, etc., can be used to manage employee attitudes and behavior.""Developing competitive strategy and achieving competitive advantage in firms, including: industry analysis, generic strategies, hypercompetition, competing against time, and building distinctive capabilities.""This course will introduce students to issues related to the role of social entrepreneurship in helping to solve social problems, including innovation, opportunity recognition, planning and the launch of new non-profit organizations.""The nature and economic role of the multinational firm and entrepreneurial ventures, including the impact of legal, political, and cultural variables upon firm performance and managerial activity; case studies illustrate interdependent nature of functional areas of business projected across national boundaries."Examination of business problems and issues in new and growing firms. Emphasis is on analyzing existing businesses. Includes a field project."A consideration of the role of business in society. Critical analysis of ethical, managerial, and public issues as they affect the corporation.""Recruitment and selection, utilization, and development of people in organizations. Examination of each personnel function; interrelationships among the functions.""One of the most crucial problems in organizations today is the management of diversity. Attempts to define the difference between equal employment opportunity/affirmative action, which has a legal basis, and diversity which has an educational basis. Organized around the concepts of: (1) cultural diversity and cultural unity; (2) development of skills and tools to manage diversity; and (3) structure of diversity development programs in organizations.""Strategy formulation, implementation, and evaluation and control in today's organizations. Emphasis is on strategic planning and decision making using the case method and/or projects.""Understanding human behavior in organizations and the nature of sustainable organizations from a managerial perspective. Special emphasis is placed on how individual differences, such as perceptions, personality, and motivation, influence individual and group behavior in organizations and on how behavior can be influenced by job design, leadership, groups, and the structure of organizations.""Ethical and social responsibilities of top managers in corporations. Topics include stakeholder management, corporate social responsibilities, strategies for sustainable development, pursuit of societal and corporate goals, board and chief executive leadership roles, governance reform and ethics, and executive leadership style and values. The presentation of course concepts is facilitated by the use of cases, discussion scenarios, and ethical dilemmas.""Critical analysis of case studies in strategic management with an emphasis on integrative decision making.  Strategy implementation in light of the global, legal, economic, cultural, and political contexts of business.""Commercialization of new technology. Topics covered include market analysis, intellectual property, product development, feasibility analysis, and new business evaluation.""The essentials of starting and operating a new business. Topics include current research on entrepreneurial perspective, starting and developing a new business, financing the venture, managing the growing firm, and special issues.""Essentials of operating an entrepreneurial firm in an international environment. Topics include international entrepreneurship, starting and developing a business in an international market, financing international ventures, international management issues, exchange rates, and culture.""Identification of high-potential, technology-intensive commercial opportunities, resources? gathering, and risk management under environmental uncertainty. Focus on technology ventures and firms that use technology strategically across several industries. Topics include key success factors and forecasting analysis across main value-chain activities.""Advanced topics germane to the management of individuals and groups over their work lives; sustained work commitment, motivation and job/career satisfaction, absenteeism, turnover, stress, leadership and career development (e.g., career ladders, mentoring).""Topics and issues in personnel management with a focus on the management of human resources in organizations. Current personnel practices, philosophies, and behavioral science research.""Personality and individual differences have significant implications for human resource management, organizational behavior and strategic management.  Research has shown that these characteristics affect many core management topics including motivation, leadership, and decision making. Surveys the literature relating personality and individual differences to management and organizations. Students will complete a wide variety of personality assessments and get their results, and reflect on how personality and individual differences can be practically relevant in the modern work environment.""Discussion of concepts and techniques used in long range strategic planning. Examination of planning practices in business and not-for-profit organizations. Topics include environmental scanning, industry analysis, forecasting, corporate and competitive strategies, and tactics.""Duties, structure, and functioning of top management teams and corporate boards of directors. CEO/board tenure and succession planning, top management compensation, board committee composition, assessment of CEO and board performance, theories of corporate governance, management of the corporate strategic agenda, governance codes, international governance, and chairman/CEO duality. Case studies and contemporary issues discussed.""Critical analysis and discussion of cases focused on strategic management of innovation.  Assessment of a firm s innovative capabilities and competitive dynamics to manage innovative processes.  Practical applications through emphasis on implementation including internal corporate venturing, management of the corporate R&D function, and institutionalization of innovation.""Provides the opportunity for students to understand the role of the professional consultant, the issues facing the management consulting industry, the competencies of various management consulting firms, the nature and form of strategic consulting engagement, and the nature and scope of strategic change in business firms.  Students will learn about management consulting functions and will practice the consultant role though cases and field studies."For students wishing to do individual research in a particular area of management."This course provides a philosophical introduction to the theoretical and empirical development of scientific knowledge.  It focuses on a variety of basic problems common to the social sciences: the nature of explanation, the structure of theories, forms of knowledge, scientific laws, nature of theory and ethics. The purpose of the course is to help doctoral students define a research context by addressing the purposes, assumptions and primary components of scientific inquiry.""This seminar involves the examination of the core theories and perspectives in organizational theory, as well as their applications and extensions. This material addresses the fundamental rationale for organizations in modern society, basic processes of organizing and organizational structure, a consideration of inter-organizational relationships and the external environment, and a variety of factors that help determine organizational effectiveness."This course will offer a critical review of organizational decision making with respect to technology and innovation.  Students will learn how technological change can alter the basis of competition; how competitive strategy drives technology investment decisions; how market-orientation should be the other backbone of technological innovation; and best practices of organizing and managing the new product development process to achieve strategic goals."The purpose of this seminar is to introduce behavioral science literature relevant to the study of behavior in organizational settings.  The course will focus on the individual's role within organizations and cover topics such as individual differences, motivation, leadership, decision-making. Learning, risk taking, interpersonal relations, etc.  Both theoretical and empirical contributions will be examined, with emphasis on integration of diverse theoretical perspectives."Preparation of a research manuscript to be submitted to a peer-reviewed academic journal. Students will work with a faculty mentor on a research project."Preparation of a second research manuscript to be submitted to a peer-reviewed academic journal. Although students work under the supervision of a faculty mentor, the students will take independent responsibility for the research project."Research."The role of marketing in society. Markets, marketing institutions, and marketing functions with emphases on product, price, marketing communication, and marketing channel decisions.""Analysis of the theory and practice of personal selling with the context of relationship marketing and salesforce automation. Topics include: goal setting, prospecting, time/territory management, questioning, presentations, objections, commitment and customer service; simulations of selling situations.""Principles, concepts, and problems involved in the development and implementation of promotional strategies. Coordination of a variety of promotional elements: advertising, sales promotion, direct marketing, public relations and publicity of web communications, and personal selling.""Functional aspects of sales force management; personal selling methods; procedures for recruiting, selecting, and training new salespeople; compensation and expense control systems; problems of sales force motivation and supervision; methods of territorial and quota assignment; sales department budgets; distributor-dealer relations; other selected topics."Analysis of major elements of strategic marketing management. May include case studies or business simulations involving decision making using marketing tools from previous courses. (For marketing majors only.)."Marketing research techniques: problem formulation, research design, questionnaire construction, sampling, data collection procedures, and analysis and interpretation of data related to marketing decisions.""Examines how customer data can be used to enhance decisions relating to acquisition, development and retention.  Topics include customer lifetime value, customer as assets, customer loyalty programs and customization.""Basic areas of retail management: buying, merchandising, retail promotion, store location, store layout, credit management, and inventory control. Emphasis on practical application of retail management principles.""Study of how consumers select, purchase, use, and dispose of goods and services. Includes analyses of how markets and others influence these processes. Application of concepts and methods of the behavioral sciences to marketing management decision making.""Marketing from a global perspective and familiarity with the problems and perspectives that global companies face. Concepts and principles of marketing strategies, market assessment, identify marketing opportunities, entry decision, emerging markets, effects of political, legal, economic and cultural environments, and decisions relating to segmentation, positioning, branding, product, price, distribution and promotions in a global setting."Analysis of current issues and problems in marketing with emphasis on new theoretical and methodological developments. Additional seminars may be offered."Focuses on marketing channels, the downstream part of a value chain, companies that come together to bring products and services from their point of origin to the point of consumption.  Topics include channel institutions, channel design, channel coordination and implementation. Highlights international and technological aspects of marketing channels so that students can successfully develop and manage marketing channels in a contemporary business environment.""Examines the role of brands and branding in market environments characterized by intense competition and consumer power. Covers issues relating to why branding is important to firms, what brands represent to consumers, and what should be done to manage them effectively.""Provides experience to students in culture, social, economic, and political environment of marketing in a foreign country. Students complete a term project (e.g., a marketing plan) based on information collected in the foreign country. Students attend briefings by experts/officials of private and public organizations.""An analytical approach to the study of marketing issues and challenges of business firms and nonprofit organizations. Emphasis on the influence of the global marketplace and the marketing environment on marketing decision making; the determination of the organization's products, prices, channels and communication strategies; an orientation that ensures sustainability of marketing operations; and the organization's system for planning and controlling its marketing effort.""Strategic marketing and decision making, with emphasis on cases utilizing qualitative and quantitative techniques and marketing models.""Scope and nature of global marketing operation; the context of international environment in which firms operate. Recent developments of international business activities, and a framework for better understanding of the basic forces driving international business and marketing operations. Development of market entry strategies and global marketing mix policies, as well as export operations. Organizational issues related to the globalization of the firm.""Principles and concepts of new product development and introduction; decision areas include market definition and structure, idea generation, concept evaluation, test marketing, launch tracking, and global product planning; models and techniques of new product evaluation used by consumer product companies."In-depth appreciation and understanding of the unique challenges inherent in managing and delivering quality services. Students will be introduced to and have the opportunity to work with tools and strategies that address these challenges."Marketing research methods are examined with emphasis on the use of advanced research methods in business research. Application of advanced sampling, measurement, and data analysis methods in research on market segmentation, market structure, consumers' perceptions and decision processes, marketing communication, new product development, and pricing.""Introduces the student to the field of marketing communications. Covers a number of topics and areas essential for understanding how to design and evaluate communication strategies necessary for the successful marketing of products and services. An integrated marketing communications (IMC) perspective is employed in covering material, with a corresponding focus on various elements of an IMC strategy, including advertising, promotions, point-of-purchase communications, direct marketing techniques, and other topics.""Core concepts and issues involved in customer relationship strategy and management in consumer and business-to-business markets. Emphasis on customer opportunity analyses, customer relationship management tools and strategies."The behavior of consumers. Intensive review of literature from relevant disciplines. Applications of concepts and methods of the behavioral sciences to marketing management decision making."Allows students to develop the ability to plan and execute a B2B business by integrating aspects of marketing with other business functions in the international context.  Product strategy, innovation, foreign market entry, supply strategies for foreign markets, pricing strategy, market research, customer service, international payments, managing international subsidiaries, licensing, distribution strategy, and responding to changing international environmental conditions. Involves a simulation-based instruction in planning and managing an international B2B business.""Design of marketing channels, developing and managing relationships with resellers, and evaluating channel performance. Emphasis on international and technological aspects of marketing channels."For students wishing to do individual research in a particular area of marketing."A rigorous foundation of the major conceptual and methodological paradigms in the consumer-behavior literature. Seeks to aid students in understanding the psychological, sociological, and anthropological roots of consumer behavior research.  Read the latest research in the area reported in leading consumer behavior/psychology journals.""Review major contributions and recent developments in marketing strategy research and practice. Review commonly used modeling approaches and research methods to study strategic interaction between firms seeking to build competitive advantages. Provide an overview of empirical research regarding measurement, level and persistence of business success and implications of findings for theory and strategy development.""Addresses key strategy and implementation issues behind customer management. Topics such as typology of CM strategies, antecedents and outcomes; environmental and managerial influences on strategy formation; technology and impact on CM strategy; and value of CM strategy.  Examine theories and concepts behind important CM issues such as customer satisfaction, customer loyalty and customer profitability.""Inter-firm and network competition; relationship among suppliers, distributors, alliance partners, external employees, and internal employees. Theories including agency theory, network theory, relationship marketing, channels of distribution theories on cooperation versus competition, IOS theories.""Introduction to methodological issues that arise when addressing a wide variety of research questions in organizational and consumer studies.  Address measurement issues (scales, reliability and construct validity), design (for experiments, surveys, or qualitative studies), sampling, and analysis (univariate and multivariate statistical procedures).  Measurement issues in cross-cultural and international research will also be covered. It is assumed that students entering the course have knowledge of introductory statistics."Preparation of a research manuscript to be submitted to a peer-reviewed academic journal. Students will work with a faculty mentor on a research project."Preparation of a second research manuscript to be submitted to a peer-reviewed academic journal. Although students work under the supervision of a faculty mentor, the students will take independent responsibility for the research project."Research."Structural characterization of ceramic, electronic, polymeric and metallic materials. Techniques include optical and electron microscopy, x-ray diffraction, and thermal analysis. Identification of materials type, microstructure, and crystal structure.""Materials Engineering majors only. Structure and properties of ceramic, electronic, polymeric and metallic materials, emphasizing differences based on structure and bonding. Phase equilibria and phase transformations.   Only one of Mat E 215, 273, or 392 may count toward graduation."Materials Engineering majors only. Laboratory exercise in materials."Materials Engineering majors only. Fundamentals of ceramic, polymeric, and composite materials; degradation, electronic, thermal, magnetic, and optical properties of materials. Materials for energy, biomaterials, and nanomaterials."Materials Engineering majors only. Laboratory exercise in materials."An introduction to the key global issues in sustainability. Focuses on interconnected roles of energy, materials, human resources, economics, and technology in building and maintaining sustainable systems. Applications discussed will include challenges in both the developed and developing world and will examine the role of technology in a resource-constrained world.   Cannot be used for technical elective credit in any engineering department.""Introduction to the structure and properties of engineering materials. Structure of crystalline solids and imperfections. Atomic diffusion. Mechanical properties and failure of ductile and brittle materials.  Dislocations and strengthening mechanisms. Phase equilibria, phase transformations, microstructure development, and heat treatment principles of common metallurgical systems including steels and aluminum alloys. Structure and mechanical properties of ceramic, polymeric and composite materials. Thermal properties of materials. Corrosion and degradation. Basic electronic properties of materials. Engineering applications.   Only one of Mat E 215, 272, 273. or 392 may count toward graduation"First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Basic laws of thermodynamics applied to phase equilibria, transformations, and reactions in multicomponent multiphase materials systems; Thermodynamic descriptions of heterogeneous systems; Binary and ternary phase diagrams; interfaces, surfaces, and defects.""Kinetic phenomena and phase equilibria relevant to the origins and stability of microstructure in metallic, ceramic and polymeric systems. Application of thermodynamics to the understanding of stable and metastable phase equilibria, interfaces and their effects on stability: defects and diffusion, empirical rate equations for transformation kinetics, driving forces and kinetics of nucleation, diffusional and diffusionless phase transformations."Use of mathematical and statistical computer tools for materials design and analysis. Applications of statistical principles to problems concerned with materials. Computer-assisted design of experiments.Materials Engineering majors only. Introduction to electronic properties of materials and their practical applications. Classical conduction models and electronic properties of metallic and ceramic materials. Elementary quantum mechanics and band theory of electron states in solids. Quantum theory of metallic conduction. Elementary semiconductor theory and devices. Polarization and dielectric properties of materials. Electron conduction in polymeric systems. Magnetic properties and applications of metals and ceramics."Ceramic crystal structures, defects, diffusion and transport. Phase equilibria and microstructures. Powder packing. Thermal, electronic, optical and magnetic properties of ceramics.""Synthesis and characterization of ceramic powders. Colloidal phenomena, rheology of suspensions, ceramic forming methods, and drying. High temperature ceramic reactions, liquid and solid-state sintering, grain growth, microstructure development. Processing/microstructure/property relationships.""Introduction to semiconductor material and device physics. Quantum mechanics and band theory of semiconductors. Charge carrier distributions, generation/recombination, transport properties. Physical and electrical properties and fabrication of semiconductor devices such as MOSFETs, bipolar transistors, laser diodes and LED's.""Electronic conduction in metals and the properties of conducting materials. Quantum mechanical behavior of free electrons and electrons in potentials wells, bonds and lattices. Development of the band theory of electron states in solids and the Free and Nearly Free Electron models. Density-of-states in energy bands and the Fermi-Dirac statistics of state occupancy. Quantum mechanical model of metallic conduction; Brillouin zones and Fermi surfaces. Additional topics include the thermal properties of metals, electron phase transitions in metallic alloys and the BCS theory of superconductivity. Classical and quantum mechanical treatment of the origins of magnetism in materials; orbital and spin angular momentum. Theory of magnetic behavior in dia-, para-magnetic, ferromagnetic materials.""Theory and practice of metal processing, including casting; powder metallurgy; additive manufacturing; rolling; forging; extrusion; drawing; material removal ; joining; surface modification; and heat treatment. Use of processing software.""Production and processing of ferrous metals. Extraction of pig iron from ore. Steelmaking processes. Equilibrium and nonequilibrium phases in the Fe-C system. Properties and processing of cast irons, plain carbon and alloy steels, stainless and specialty steels. Transformation diagrams, hardenability, and surface treatments. Continuous casting, forging, hot rolling, quenching, and tempering as they apply to ferrous materials. Cost and mechanical performance considerations in cast iron and steel selection and heat treatment.""Theory and applications related to metal casting, welding, polymer processing, powder metallurgy, and composites manufacturing.""Introduction to polymeric materials, synthesis, structure and properties. Relationship between polymer composition, processing and properties.""Radiography, ultrasonic testing, magnetic particle inspection, eddy current testing, dye penetrant inspection, and other techniques. Physical bases of tests; materials to which applicable; types of defects detectable; calibration standards, and reliability safety precautions.""Application of nondestructive testing techniques to the detection and sizing of flaws in materials and to the characterization of material's microstructure. Included are experiments in hardness, dye penetrant, magnetic particle, x-ray, ultrasonic and eddy current testing. Field trips to industrial laboratories.""A project-based, hands-on learning course. Technology literacy, appreciation for technological innovations, principles behind many technological innovations, hands-on laboratory experiences based upon simple systems constructed out of LEGOs and controlled by small microcomputers. Future K-12 teachers will leave the course with complete lesson plans for use in their upcoming careers.""Introduction to the historical role of women as related to US industry, family and community with emphasis on the years 1830 - 1945, but also related to the current climate. Topics completed in 392 with arranged lectures at Brunel University. Orientation for Brunel summer study program.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Credit for graduation allowable only upon completion of Mat E 392.""Structure and properties of ceramic, electronic, polymeric and metallic materials, emphasizing differences based on structure and bonding. Phase equilibria and phase transformations. Taught on Brunel University campus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  Only one of Mat E 215, 273, or 392 may count toward graduation.""Fundamentals of sustainable engineering related to biofuels.  Basics of food and biofuel chemistry and fluid dynamics.  Preparation course for Italy as a case study for food and sustainable engineering.  Orientation for summer study abroad program in Torino, Italy.  Credit for graduation allowable only upon completion of the following summer's offering of MAT E 316 taught in Italy, along with additional sustainability lessons/tours."Summer professional work period."Professional work period, one semester maximum per academic year."Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Preparation for a career in materials engineering or graduate school; experiential learning, resumes, interviewing, Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, leadership, international opportunities, professional ethics, graduate school preparation and opportunities, and alternative career paths (med school, law school, etc.).   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Fundamentals of materials engineering design, information sources, team behavior, professional preparation, quantitative design including finite-element analysis and computer aided design, materials selection, informatics and combinatorial methods. Analysis of design problems, development of solutions, selected case studies.  Oral presentation skills. Preparations for spring project.""Integration of materials processing, structure/composition, properties and performance principles in materials engineering problems. Multi-scale design of materials, materials processing, case studies including cost analysis, ethics, risk and safety. Team projects specified by either industry or academic partners.  Written and oral final project reports.""Mechanical behavior of ceramics, metals, polymers, and composites. Relationships between materials processing and atomic aspects of elasticity, plasticity, fracture, and fatigue. Life prediction, stress-and failure analysis.""Composition, structure, properties manufacturing, and applications of inorganic glasses. Mechanical, structural, thermal, optical, ionic, electronic, and biological applications of inorganic glasses, especially silicate glasses. Contemporary topics in glass science and engineering such as glass optical fiber communication and flat panel display technologies. Laboratory exercises in the preparation and characterization of silicate glasses. Nonmajor graduate credit.""Techniques used in modern integrated circuit fabrication, including diffusion, oxidation, ion implantation, lithography, evaporation, sputtering, chemical-vapor deposition, and etching. Process integration. Process evaluation and final device testing. Extensive laboratory exercises utilizing fabrication methods to build electronic devices. Use of computer simulation tools for predicting processing outcomes. Recent advances in processing CMOS ICs and micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS).""Charged point defects and formation equations. Non-stoichiometric conductors, dielectric, ferroelectric, and piezoelectric materials and applications. Optical properties, optical spectra of materials, optoelectronic devices. Magnetic and superconducting materials. Contemporary topics in advanced ceramics.""Processing of metals and alloys to obtain desired mechanical properties by manipulation of their microstructure and composition of constituent phase(s). Relevance of defects to mechanical properties, plastic flow. Strengthening mechanisms in metals and alloys. Microstructure, heat treatment and mechanical properties of engineering alloys. Metal-matrix composites.""Corrosion and corrosion control of metallic systems. Corrosion fundamentals, classification of different types of metallic corrosion, corrosion properties of various engineering alloys, corrosion control. Failure analysis. Characteristics of common types of metallic failures, case studies of failures, designing to reduce failure risk.""Introductory and advanced topics in structural health monitoring (SHM) of aeronautical, civil, and mechanical systems. Topics include sensors, signal processing in time and frequency domains, data acquisition and transmission systems, design of integrated SHM solutions, nodestructive evaluation techniques, feature extraction methods, and cutting edge research in the field of SHM. Graduate students will have a supervisory role to assist students in 449 and an additional design project or more in-depth analysis and design.""Overview of polymer chemical composition, microstructure, thermal and mechanical properties, rheology, and principles of polymer materials selection. Intensive laboratory experiments include chemical composition studies, microstructural characterization, thermal analysis, and mechanical testing.""Basic concepts in polymer composites, blends, and block copolymers. Phase separation and miscibility, microstructures and mechanical behavior. Fiber reinforced and laminated composites. Viscosity, rheology, viscoelasticity of polymers. Polymer melt processing methods such as injection molding and extrusion; selection of suitable processing methods and their applications.""Presentation of the basic chemical and physical properties of biomaterials, including metals, ceramics, and polymers, as they are related to their manipulation by the engineer for incorporation into living systems. Role of microstructure properties in the choice of biomaterials and design of artificial organs, implants, and prostheses.""Electronic configuration, valence states, minerals, ores, beneficiation, extraction, separation, metal preparation and purification. Crystal structures, phase transformations and polymorphism, and thermochemical properties of rare earth metals.  Chemical properties: inorganic and organometallic compounds, alloy chemistry, nature of the chemical bonding.  Physical properties: mechanical and elastic properties, magnetic properties, resistivity, and superconductivity.""Application of team design concepts to projects of a multidisciplinary nature. Concurrent treatment of design, manufacturing and life cycle considerations. Application of design tools such as CAD, CAM and FEM. Design methodologies, project scheduling, cost estimating, quality control, manufacturing processes. Development of a prototype and appropriate documentation in the form of written reports, oral presentations, computer models and engineering drawings.""Build and test of a conceptual design. Detail design, manufacturability, test criteria and procedures. Application of design tools such as CAD and CAM and manufacturing techniques such as rapid prototyping. Development and testing of a full-scale prototype with appropriate documentation in the form of design journals, written reports, oral presentations and computer models and engineering drawings.""Introduction to the basic methods used in the computational modeling and simulation of materials, from atomistic simulations to methods at the mesoscale. Students will be expected to develop and run sample programs. Topics to be covered include, for example, electronic structure calculations, molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, phase-field methods, etc.""Electromagnetic fields of various eddy current probes. Probe field interaction with conductors, cracks and other material defects. Ferromagnetic materials. Layered conductors. Elementary inversion of probe signals to characterize defects. Special techniques including remote-field, transient, potential drop nondestructive evaluation and the use of Hall sensors. Practical assignments using a 'virtual' eddy current instrument will demonstrate key concepts."Investigation of individual research or special topics.Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Geometric and algebraic representations of symmetry.  Pair distribution function.  Structure, chemistry, and basic properties of covalent, ionic, and metallic solids, glasses and liquids, and polymers.  Interactions of materials with particles and waves.  Relationships between direct and reciprocal spaces.  The kinematical theory of diffraction, with an introduction to the dynamical theory.""Magnetic fields, flux density and magnetization. Magnetic materials, magnetic measurements. Magnetic properties of materials. Domains, domain walls, domain processes, magnetization curves and hysteresis. Types of magnetic order, magnetic phases and critical phenomena. Magnetic moments of electrons, theory of electron magnetism. Technological application, soft magnetic materials for electromagnets, hard magnetic materials, permanent magnets, magnetic recording technology, magnetic measurements of properties for materials evaluation.""A review of the fundamental principles of heat, work, basic thermodynamic relations, and criteria for equilibrium. Analytical treatments for the thermodynamic description of multicomponent chemical solutions and reacting systems are developed and employed to predict phase equilibria in materials systems. Builds on the thermodynamic construction to treat the kinetics of chemical reactions and phase transformations. Topics include general first order and second order transitions, along with chemical diffusion. Detailed examples involving nucleation and diffusion limited growth, spinodal decomposition, martensitic transformations, magnetic and electric transitions, and glass formation will be considered.""Effect of chemical structure and morphology on properties. Linear viscoelasticity, damping and stress relaxation phenomena. Structure and mechanics of filler and fiber reinforced composites. Mechanical properties and failure mechanisms. Material selection and designing with polymers. Processing of polymer and composite parts.""Development of a quantitative description of the electronic structure of solids starting with fundamentals of atoms, atomic bonding, basic crystallography, and band theory of solids. Continuum properties of solids in response to electromagnetic fields and thermal gradients.  Quantitative description of the atomistic properties of solids through electron-electron interactions, electron-phonon interactions, and dipole interactions.""Techniques used in modern integrated circuit fabrication, including diffusion, oxidation, ion implantation, lithography, evaporation, sputtering, chemical-vapor deposition, and etching. Process integration. Process evaluation and final device testing. Extensive laboratory exercises utilizing fabrication methods to build electronic devices. Use of computer simulation tools for predicting processing outcomes. Recent advances in processing CMOS ICs and micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS).""Mechanical behavior of materials with emphasis on micromechanics of deformation in three generic regimes: elasticity, plasticity, and fracture. A materials science approach is followed to understand and model the mechanical behavior that combines continuum mechanics, thermodynamics, kinetics, and microstructure. Some topics include elastic properties of materials, permanent deformation mechanisms at different temperatures (e.g., via dislocation motion and creep), and fracture in ductile and brittle materials. Specific classes of materials that are studied: metals, ceramics, polymers, glasses and composites.""Principles of five basic NDE methods and their application in engineering inspections. Materials behavior and simple failure analysis. NDE reliability, and damage-tolerant design. Advanced methods such as acoustic microscopy, laser ultrasonics, thermal waves, and computed tomography are analyzed. Computer-based experiments on a selection of methods: ultrasonics, eddy currents, x-rays are assigned for student completion.""Characterization of ceramic, metal, polymer and glassy materials using modern analytical techniques. Spectroscopic (IR, Raman, UV/VIS/NIR, and NMR), thermal (DSC, DTA/TGA, and DMA) methods, mechanical and rheological testing, magnetic and electrical characterization, and powder characterization.""Characterization of materials using scanning electron microscope (SEM), electron microprobe, and auger spectrometer. Compositional determination using energy and wavelength dispersive x-ray and Auger spectroscopies. Specimen preparation. Laboratory covers SEM operation.""Basic concepts in polymer composites, blends, and block copolymers. Phase separation and miscibility, microstructures and mechanical behavior. Fiber reinforced and laminated composites. Viscosity, rheology, viscoelasticity of polymers. Polymer melt processing methods such as injection molding and extrusion; selection of suitable processing methods and their applications.""Presentation of the basic chemical and physical properties of biomaterials, including metals, ceramics, and polymers, as they are related to their manipulation by the engineer for incorporation into living systems. Role of microstructure properties in the choice of biomaterials and design of artificial organs, implants, and prostheses.""Electronic configuration, valence states, minerals, ores, beneficiation, extraction, separation, metal preparation and purification. Crystal structures, phase transformations and polymorphism, and thermochemical properties of rare earth metals.  Chemical properties: inorganic and organometallic compounds, alloy chemistry, nature of the chemical bonding.  Physical properties: mechanical and elastic properties, magnetic properties, resistivity, and superconductivity.""Materials and mechanics approach to fracture and fatigue. Fracture mechanics, brittle and ductile fracture, fracture and fatigue characteristics, fracture of thin films and layered structures. Fracture and fatigue tests, mechanics and materials designed to avoid fracture or fatigue."Mechanics of fiber-reinforced materials. Micromechanics of lamina. Macromechanical behavior of lamina and laminates. Strength and interlaminar stresses of laminates. Failure criteria. Stress analysis of laminates. Thermal moisture and residual stresses. Joints in composites."A project-based, hands-on learning course. Technology literacy, appreciation for technological innovations, principles behind many technological innovations, hands-on experiences based upon simple systems constructed out of LEGOs and controlled by small microcomputers. Other technological advances with K-12 applications will be explored. K-12 teachers will leave the course with complete lesson plans for use in their classrooms.""Introduction to the basic methods used in the computational modeling and simulation of materials, from atomistic simulations to methods at the mesoscale. Students will be expected to develop and run sample programs. Topics to be covered include, for example, electronic structure calculations, molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, phase-field methods, etc.""Electromagnetic fields of various eddy current probes. Probe field interaction with conductors, cracks and other material defects. Ferromagnetic materials. Layered conductors. Elementary inversion of probe signals to characterize defects. Special techniques including remote-field, transient, potential drop nondestructive evaluation and the use of Hall sensors. Practical assignments using a 'virtual' eddy current instrument will demonstrate key concepts."Seminar course - presentations given on a weekly basis by leading U.S. and International researchers that are experts in their respective fields closely related to Materials Science.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Explores various advanced theoretical treatments of the energetics and kinetics of multicomponent materials. Topics include analytical and computational descriptions of thermodynamic quantities, experimental measurement of essential physical properties, analytical and computational treatments of kinetic processes, and the use of theoretical predictions of phase equilibria and evolution in materials systems.""Advanced course in the behavior of solids within the framework of solid state physics and chemistry.  Includes magnetic, dielectric, transport, and optical phenomena in solids.  Influence of phase transformations and crystal symmetry on the physical properties.""Advanced structural characterization of materials using powder diffraction. Production of X-ray and neutron radiation. Review of symmetry, group and kinematical theories of diffraction. Mathematical and computational backgrounds of powder diffraction data. Introduction to single crystal diffraction methods, origin of powder diffraction pattern, history of the technique. Modern powder diffraction methods. Indexing of powder diffraction patterns, figures of merit, precise lattice parameters. Phase problem, determining crystal structures from symmetry and geometry, Patterson, direct and Fourier methods. Rietveled method, precise crystal structures: atomic parameters, qualitative and quantitative phase identification, preferred orientation, grain size, strain, residual stress, order-disorder. Powder diffraction at non-ambient conditions. Applications of powder diffraction: data bases, phase transformations, phase diagrams, local structures, magnetism.""Theory and application of transmission electron microscopy to inorganic materials. Specimen preparation, selected area and convergent beam electron diffraction, bright field/dark field/high resolution imaging. Compositional analysis using X-ray and electron energy loss spectroscopy."One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."For students who do not have adequate facility with topics from high school algebra or do   not meet the algebra admission requirement.  The course is divided into tracks of one- and   two-semester lengths. For most students a diagnostic exam will determine which track   must be taken. Students will receive a grade in MATH 25 or MATH 30 respectively depending on the   level of material covered. Satisfactory completion of MATH 30 is recommended for students   planning to take MATH 140, MATH 143, MATH 145, MATH 150, or MATH 151, while MATH 25 is sufficient for MATH 104, MATH 105, MATH 195, STAT 101 or STAT 105. Students must complete MATH 30 to remove a deficiency in the algebra   admission requirement. Topics include signed numbers, polynomials, rational and radical   expressions, exponential and logarithmic expressions, and equations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Students should initially enroll in MATH 10.  See description of MATH 10.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Students should initially enroll in MATH 10.  See description of MATH 10.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."For new majors. Academic policies and procedures. Campus resources and opportunities available to students. Careers and programs of study in mathematics.  Mathematical reasoning, culture and resources. Description of main branches of mathematics.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Permutations, combinations, probability, expected value, and applications.   Either MATH 104 or MATH 150 may be counted toward graduation, but not both.""Introduction to contemporary mathematics with an emphasis on use of mathematics to solve real world problems.  Typical topics are the mathematics of voting, methods of fair division and apportionment, and elementary game theory.""Coordinate geometry, quadratic and polynomial equations, functions, graphing, rational functions, exponential and logarithmic functions, inverse functions, quadratic inequalities.   Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may not count MATH 140 toward the General Education Requirements.""Preparation for MATH 160, 165, and 181. Functions, graphing, basic trigonometry, logarithms, exponentials. Emphasis on co-variational reasoning. Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may not count MATH 143 toward General Education Requirements.   Only one of MATH 143 and 145 may count toward graduation.""Mathematical ideas regarding the conception of space.  General trigonometry, with an emphasis on the calculation of lengths, areas, and angles.  The Law of Sines and the Law of Cosines.  Polar, cylindrical, and spherical coordinate systems.  Conic sections and quadric surfaces.   Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may not count Math 145 toward the General Education Requirements.  Only one of Math 143 and 145 may count toward graduation.""Linear equations and inequalities, matrix algebra, linear programming, discrete probability.   Either MATH 104 or MATH 150 may be counted toward graduation, but not both.""Differential calculus, applications to max-min problems, integral calculus and applications. Will not serve as prerequisite for MATH 265 or MATH 266.   Only one of MATH 151, MATH 160, the sequence MATH 165-MATH 166, or the sequence MATH 181-MATH 182 may be counted towards graduation.""Analytic geometry, derivatives and integrals of elementary functions, simple differential equations, and applications. Will not serve as a prerequisite for MATH 265 or MATH 266.   Only one of MATH 151, MATH 160, the sequence MATH 165-MATH 166, or the sequence MATH 181-MATH 182 may be counted towards graduation.""Differential calculus, applications of the derivative, introduction to integral calculus.   Only one of Math 151 or 160 or the sequence MATH 165-MATH 166, or the sequence MATH 181-MATH 182 may be counted towards graduation.""Integral calculus, applications of the integral, infinite series, parametric curves and polar coordinates.   Only one of MATH 151, MATH 160, the sequence MATH 165-MATH 166, or the sequence MATH 181-MATH 182 may be counted towards graduation.""Integral calculus, applications of the integral, infinite series, parametric curves, and polar coordinates.  Additional material of a theoretical, conceptual, computational, or modeling nature. Some of the work may require more ingenuity than is required for MATH 166. Preference will be given to students in the University Honors Program.   Only one of MATH 151 or MATH 160, the sequence MATH 165-MATH 166, or the sequence MATH 181-MATH 182 may be counted towards graduation.""Exponential and logarithm functions, difference equations, derivatives, and applications of the derivative.  Examples taken from biology.   Only one of MATH 151, MATH 160, the sequence MATH 165- MATH 166, or the sequence MATH 181-MATH 182 may be counted towards graduation.""Integration, first and second order differential equations, applications of the definite integral, introduction to multivariable calculus. Examples taken from biology.   Only one of MATH 151, MATH 160, the sequence MATH 165-MATH 166, or the sequence MATH 181-MATH 182 may be counted   towards graduation.""Whole number operations through analysis of properties, theoretical and hands-on models, mathematical analysis of elementary studentsÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ thinking, standard and non-standard algorithms; structure of the decimal system; linear measurement, and two- and three-dimensional geometric shapes and spatial sense, number theory, algebra as it relates to elementary curricula/teaching profession.   Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may not count MATH 195 toward General Education Requirements.""Integer, fraction and decimal operations through analysis of properties, theoretical and hands-on models, mathematical analysis of elementary studentsÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ thinking, standard and non-standard algorithms: two- and three-dimensional measurement; probability, statistics, proportional reasoning, algebra as it relates to elementary curricula and teaching profession.""Logic and techniques of proof including induction. Communicating mathematics. Writing proofs about sets, functions, real numbers, limits, sequences, infinite series and continuous functions.""Systems of linear equations, determinants, vector spaces, linear transformations,   orthogonality, least-squares methods, eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Emphasis on   applications and techniques.   Only one of MATH 207 and  MATH 317 may be counted toward graduation.""Analytic geometry and vectors, differential calculus of functions of several variables, multiple   integrals, vector calculus.""Analytic geometry and vectors, differential calculus of functions of several variables, multiple integrals, vector calculus. Additional material of a theoretical, conceptual, computational, or modeling nature. Some of the work may require more ingenuity than is required in MATH 265. Preference will be given to students in the University Honors Program.""Solution methods for ordinary differential equations. First order equations, linear equations, constant coefficient   equations. Eigenvalue methods for systems of first order linear equations. Introduction to stability and phase   plane analysis."Same as MATH 266 but also including Laplace transforms and series solutions to ordinary differential equations."Laplace transforms and series solutions to ordinary differential equations.   Together, MATH 266 and MATH 268 are the same as MATH 267."Systems portion of MATH 266 and MATH 267: Eigenvalue methods for systems of first order linear equations.  Introduction to stability and phase plane analysis.  For students supplementing transfer courses in differential equations in order to earn credit in MATH 266 or 267.   Students with credit in 266 or 267 may not earn credit in 269.Independent study.Independent study."Mathematical reasoning and topics in Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry including transformations, congruence, and similarity.  Exploration of probability with simulations.  Use of technology to learn and teach mathematics."Theory of groups. Homomorphisms. Quotient groups. Introduction to rings. Emphasis on   writing proofs.Theory of rings and fields. Introduction to Galois theory. Emphasis on writing proofs."Enumeration strategies involving permutations, combinations, partitions, binomial coefficients,  inclusion-exclusion principle, recurrence relations, generating functions. Additional  topics selected from probability, algebraic combinatorics, and applications.""Structure and extremal properties of graphs. Topics are selected from: trees, networks,   colorings, paths and cycles, connectivity, planarity, directed graphs, matchings, Ramsey theory, forbidden structures,   enumeration, applications.""Systems of linear equations, determinants, vector spaces, inner product spaces, linear   transformations, eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Emphasis on writing proofs and results.   Only one of MATH 207 and MATH 317 may be counted toward graduation.""Set theory, metric spaces, topological spaces, continuity, connectedness, functions, homeomorphisms, compactness, and topological invariants.  Examples from surfaces,  knots, and various abstract objects.  Emphasis on writing proofs."Probability; distribution functions and their properties; classical discrete and continuous distribution functions; multivariate probability distributions and their properties; moment generating functions; simulation of random variables and use of the R statistical package.   Credit for both STAT 341 and STAT 447 may not be applied toward graduation.Transformations of random variables; sampling distributions; confidence intervals and hypothesis testing; theory of estimation and hypothesis tests; linear model theory; use of the R statistical package for simulation and data analysis."Divisibility, integer representations, primes and divisors, linear diophantine equations,   congruences, and multiplicative functions. Applications to cryptography.""Functions of a complex variable, including differentiation, integration and series expansions,   residues, evaluation of integrals, conformal mapping."Vector and matrix programming and graphing in MATLAB for scientific applications. Polynomial interpolation and approximation. Systems of linear equations and numerical linear algebra. Numerical differentiation and integration. Newton methods for solving nonlinear equations and optimization in one and several variables. Fast Fourier transform.  Emphasis on effective use of mathematical software and understanding of its strengths and limitations."Separation of variables methods for elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic partial differential   equations. Topics from Fourier series, Sturm-Liouville theory, Bessel functions, spherical   harmonics, and method of characteristics.""Coursework in university mathematics including calculus, abstract algebra, discrete mathematics, geometry, and other topics as it relates to teaching mathematics in grades 5-12."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior   to commencing each work period."Advanced topics in applied linear algebra including eigenvalues, eigenvalue localization, singular value decomposition, symmetric and Hermitian matrices, nonnegative and stochastic matrices, matrix norms, canonical forms, matrix functions. Applications to mathematical and physical sciences, engineering, and other fields.""A careful development of calculus of functions of one real variable: real number properties, sequences and series, limits, continuity, differentiation, and integration.""Sequences and series of functions of a real variable, uniform convergence, power series   and Taylor series, Fourier series, topology of n-dimensional space, implicit function   theorem,  calculus of the plane and 3-dimensional space.  Additional topics may include   metric spaces or Stieltjes or Lebesgue integration.""Propositional and predicate logic.  Topics selected from Horn logic, equational logic,   resolution and unification, foundations of logic programming, reasoning about programs, program specification and verification, model checking and binary decision diagrams, temporal logic and modal logic."Numerical serial and parallel computing using the Message Passing Interface. Oral and written semester project."Euclidean geometry. Points, lines, circles, triangles, congruence, similarity, properties invariant under rigid motions. Synthetic, analytic, and axiomatic methods.""Continuation of Euclidean geometry with topics from elliptic, projective, or hyperbolic geometry. Emphasis on analytic methods."Iteration of maps; classification of periodic points;  Julia sets and the Mandelbrot set; fractals and fractal dimension; chaos."Applications of mathematical methods to problems in finance. Lagrange Multiplier Method, applications to mean-variance portfolio selection and utility maximization, binomial asset pricing model. Binary Martingales, Optional Stopping Theorem, Central Limit Theorem, applications to financial derivative pricing.""First order Euler method, high order Runge-Kutta method, and multistep method for solving ordinary differential equations. Finite difference and finite element methods for solving partial differential equations. Local truncation error, stability, and convergence for finite difference method.  Numerical solution space, polynomial approximation, and error estimate for finite element method."No more than 9 credits of Math 490 or Math 490H may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of Math 490 or 490H may be counted toward graduation."Writing and presenting a formal mathematics paper. Upon approval by the department, the paper will satisfy the departmental advanced English requirement.""Introduction to independent mathematical thought, with emphasis on oral communication of an advanced topic.  Seminar content varies.""Theory and methods for teaching mathematics in grades 5-12. Includes critical examination of instructional strategies, curriculum materials, learning tools, assessment methods, Common Core State Standards-Mathematics, and equity issues."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior   to commencing each work period."A development of the real numbers. Study of metric spaces, completeness, compactness,   sequences, and continuity of functions. Differentiation and integration of real-valued   functions, sequences of functions, limits and convergence, equicontinuity.""Introduction to general topology. Topological spaces, continuous functions, connectedness, compactness. Topics selected from countability and separation axioms, metrization, and complete metric spaces.   Topics in algebraic topology.""Algebraic systems and their morphisms, with emphasis on groups and rings.""Continuation of MATH 504.  Algebraic systems and their morphisms, with emphasis on modules and fields.""Advanced topics in applied linear algebra including eigenvalues, eigenvalue localization, singular value decomposition, symmetric and Hermitian matrices, nonnegative and stochastic matrices, matrix norms, canonical forms, matrix functions. Applications to mathematical and physical sciences, engineering, and other fields.""Advanced topics in linear algebra including canonical forms; unitary, normal, Hermitian and   positive-definite matrices; variational characterizations of eigenvalues.""Theory of analytic functions, integration, topology of the extended complex plane,   singularities and residue theory, maximum principle, conformal mapping, meromorphic functions, argument principle.""Lebesgue measure and Lebesgue integral, one variable differentiation theory, Fubini and Tonelli theorems in R^n, Lp spaces.""Metric spaces, topological spaces, compactness, abstract theory of measure and integral, differentiation of measures, Banach spaces.""Finite difference methods for partial differential equations. Methods for elliptic equations; explicit and implicit methods for parabolic and hyperbolic equations; stability, accuracy, and convergence theory, including von Neumann analysis, modified equations, and the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition.""Techniques of classical and functional analysis with applications to  differential   equations and integral equations.  Vector spaces,   metric spaces, Hilbert and Banach spaces, Sobolev spaces and other function spaces, contraction mapping theorem, distributions,   Fourier series and Fourier transform,   linear operators, spectral theory of differential and integral operators, Green's functions and     boundary value problems, weak solutions of partial differential equations and variational    methods,  calculus in Banach spaces and   applications."Continuation of MATH 519.Introduction to parallelization techniques and numerical methods for distributed memory high performance computers. A semester project in an area related to each studentÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s research interests is required."Basic concepts of secure communication, DES and AES, public-key cryptosystems, elliptic curves, hash algorithms, digital signatures, applications. Relevant material on number theory and finite fields.""Basic principles of covert communication, steganalysis, and forensic analysis for digital images. Steganographic security and   capacity, matrix embedding, blind attacks, image forensic detection and device identification techniques. Related material on coding   theory, statistics, image processing, pattern recognition.""Research studies in mathematics learning and teaching, exemplary practices in mathematics education, and current state and   national trends in the mathematics curriculum in grades K-12.  Students in MSM take each of 540A, 540B, and 540C.  Topics are offered on a 3-year cycle. A. Assessment, equity, and teaching of statistics.  Offered SS 2017. B. Geometry and discrete mathematics, and problem solving.  Offered SS 2018. C. Teaching of analysis, algebra, and the use of technology.  Offered SS 2016.""Research studies in mathematics learning and teaching, exemplary practices in mathematics education, and current state and   national trends in the mathematics curriculum in grades K-12.  Topics are offered on a 3-year cycle.  Offered SS 2017.""Research studies in mathematics learning and teaching, exemplary practices in mathematics education, and current state and national trends in the mathematics curriculum in grades K-12.  Offered on a 3-year cycle.  Offered SS 2018.""Research studies in mathematics learning and teaching, exemplary practices in mathematics education, and current state and   national trends in the mathematics curriculum in grades K-12.  Topics are offered on a 3-year cycle.  Offered SS  2016.""Offered on a 3-year cycle, offered SS. 2016. The fundamental concepts of calculus which are critical to the effective understanding of the material in first year calculus.   Emphasis is on a constructivist approach to learning, cooperative groups, problem solving, and use of technology.""Offered on a 3- year cycle, offered SS.  2016. The use of technology in secondary mathematics with an emphasis on the exploration, creation, and implementation of algorithms.""Offered on a 3-year cycle, offered SS. 2018. Applications of graph theory, game theory, voting theory, recursion,   combinatorics, and algebraic structures.  Issues in integrating   discrete topics into the secondary curriculum. Use of the computer to explore discrete mathematics.""Offered on a 3-year cycle, offered SS. 2018. A study of geometry with emphasis on metrics,  the group of isometries, and the group   of similarities. Specific spaces studied normally include the Euclidean plane, the 2-sphere,  projective 2-space, and hyperbolic   geometry.   Emphasis on analytical methods. Incorporation of geometry software.""Markov chains on discrete spaces in discrete and continuous time (random walks, Poisson   processes, birth and death processes) and their long-term behavior. Optional topics may include branching processes, renewal theory, introduction to Brownian motion.""The initial-value problem, existence and uniqueness theorems, continuous dependence on   parameters, linear systems, stability and   asymptotic behavior of solutions, linearization,   dynamical systems, bifurcations, and chaotic behavior.""Approximation theory, including polynomial interpolation, spline interpolation and best approximation; numerical differentiation and integration; numerical methods for ordinary differential equations.""Numerical linear algebra including LU factorization, QR factorization, linear least squares, singular value decompositions, eigenvalue problems, and iterative methods for large linear systems.""Theory and methods for constrained and unconstrained optimization. Steepest-descent, conjugate gradient, Newton and quasi-Newton, line search and trust-region, first and second order necessary and sufficient conditions, linear, quadratic and general nonlinear programming.""Algorithms for linear programming, integer and combinatorial optimization. Linear programming, duality theory, simplex algorithm; the solution of the shortest-path, minimum spanning tree, max-flow/min-cut, minimum cost flow, maximum matching, and traveling salesman problems; integer linear programming, branch-and-bound, local and global search algorithms; matroids and greedy algorithms."Linear algebra review. Least square method and singular value decomposition. State space modeling of linear continuous-time systems. Solution of linear systems. Controllability and observability. Canonical description of linear equations. Stability of linear systems. State feedback and pole placements. Observer design for linear systems.Linear vs nonlinear systems. Phase plane analysis. Bifurcation and center manifold theory. Lyapunov stability. Absolute stability of feedback systems. Input-output stability. Passivity theory and feedback linearization. Nonlinear control design techniques.Fall semester orientation seminar. Required for graduate students in Mathematics and Applied Mathematics. Topics include teaching at the university level and communication of mathematics.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Spring semester orientation seminar. Required for graduate students in Mathematics and Applied Mathematics. Topics include   teaching at the university level and communication of mathematics.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Model theory of propositional and predicate logic, the Soundness Theorem, the Compactness Theorem, the Goedel-Henkin Completeness Theorem, the Incompleteness Theorem, computability theory.  As time permits: modal and temporal logic, set theory (the continuum hypothesis).  Emphasis on the relationship between `provable' and `true' and the relationship between `computable' and `definable'."Combinatorial designs and Latin squares. Construction methods including finite fields.   Error-correcting codes. Adjacency matrices and algebraic combinatorics.Ordered sets and lattices. Generating functions. Moebius inversion and other enumeration   methods."Structural theory of graphs. Topics include basic structures (trees, paths and   cycles), networks, colorings,   connectivity, topological graph theory, Ramsey theory, forbidden   graphs and minors, applications.""Study of extremal graph problems and methods. Topics include canonical Ramsey theory, generalizations of TuranÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s theorem, Szemeredi's regularity lemma, random graph theory.""First semester of full-year course. Subalgebras, homomorphisms, congruence relations,   and direct products. Lattices and closure   operators. Varieties and quasivarieties of   algebras, free algebras, Birkhoff's theorems, clones, Mal'cev conditions. Advanced topics."Continuation of MATH 615.Categories and functors and their applications.Representations of algebraic structures.  Content varies by semester."Topics selected from: Geometry of curves and surfaces. Manifolds, coordinate systems.  Tangent and cotangent vectors, vector fields.  Tensors, differential forms, Riemannian   metrics. Connections, covariant differentiation,   curvature tensors.  Applications to physics and engineering.""Fundamental theory of normed linear spaces and algebras, such as topology and continuity, duality and spectral theory,   emphasizing aspects that provide a framework for the study of the spectrum of an operator, analytic function theory, and modern operator theory.""Sequences and set theory; Lebesgue measure, measurable functions. Absolute continuity of functions, integrability and the fundamental theorem of Lebesgue integration. General measure spaces, probability measure, extension theorem and construction of Lebesgue-Stieljes measures on Euclidean spaces. Measurable transformations and random variables, induced measures and probability distributions. General integration and expectation, Lp-spaces and integral inequalities. Uniform integrability and absolute continuity of measures. Probability densities and the Radon-Nikodym theorem. Product spaces and Fubini-Tonelli theorems.""Probability spaces and random variables. Kolmogorov's consistency theorem. Independence, Borel-Cantelli lemmas and Kolmogorov's 0 - 1 Law. Comparing types of convergence for random variables. Sums of independent random variables, empirical distributions, weak and strong laws of large numbers. Convergence in distribution and its characterizations, tightness, characteristic functions, central limit theorems and Lindeberg-Feller conditions. Conditional probability and expectation. Discrete parameter martingales and their properties and applications."Weak convergence. Random walks and Brownian motion. Martingales. Stochastic integration and Ito's Formula. Stochastic differential   equations and applications."Modeling of the dynamics of complex systems on multiple scales: Classical and dissipative molecular dynamics, stochastic modeling and Monte-Carlo simulation; coarse grained nonlinear dynamics, interface propagation and spatial pattern formation.""Study of model problems of elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic types, first order equations, conservation laws, transform methods, introduction to linear partial differential equations of arbitrary order, fundamental solutions.""Sobolev spaces, general theory of second order linear elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations, first order linear hyperbolic systems, variational methods, fixed point methods.""Weak and variational formulations of elliptic problems; weak derivatives and Sobolev spaces; Lax-Milgram theorem, Bramble-Hilbert lemma; examples of finite element spaces; polynomial approximation theory; error estimates for finite element methods; implementation issues; mixed finite element methods for Stokes problems; applications.""Introduction to the field of Mechanical Engineering through problem-solving in a range of topics including statics, mechanics of materials and thermo-fluids. Techniques to professionally present and communicate solutions. Use of MATLAB computer programming to aid problem solving, including curve fitting and graphing.   Only one of M E 160, ENGR 160, Aer E 160, C E 160, CPR E 185, E E 185, S E 185 and I E 148 may count towards graduation.""Integration of fundamental graphics, computer modeling, and engineering design. Applications of multiview drawings and dimensioning. Techniques for visualizing, analyzing, and communicating 3-D geometries. Application of the design process including written and oral reports. Freehand and computer methods."Enrollment in M E learning communities."Preparation for a career in mechanical engineering; discussion of opportunities for leadership, undergraduate research, experiential learning.""An introduction to the key global issues in sustainability. Focuses on interconnected roles of energy, materials, human resources, economics, and technology in building and maintaining sustainable systems. Applications discussed will include challenges in both the developed and developing world and will examine the role of technology in a resource-constrained world.   Cannot be used for technical elective credit in any engineering department.""Fundamental concepts based on zeroth, first and second laws of thermodynamics. Properties and processes for ideal gases and solid-liquid-vapor phases of pure substances. Applications to vapor power cycles.   Credit for either M E 231 or 330, but not both, may be applied toward graduation."Overview of mechanical engineering design with applications to thermal and mechanical systems. Introduction to current design practices used in industry. Semester-long team project focused on addressing societal needs. Past projects include designing human powered charging systems and products for developing nations.First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Fundamentals of manufacturing processes including forming, machining, casting and welding with emphasis on design considerations in manufacturing. Mechanical behavior of metallic materials. Modern manufacturing practices.""Laboratory exercises in metrology, mechanical testing (tensile/compression and hardness tests), computer aided design (CAD), machining operations, metal welding, metal casting, and bulk/sheet metal forming.""Philosophy of design and design methodology. Consideration of stresses and failure models useful for static and fatigue loading. Analysis, selection and synthesis of machine elements.""Gas power cycles. Fundamentals of gas mixtures, psychrometry, and thermochemistry. Applications to one-dimensional compressible flow, refrigeration, air conditioning and combustion processes."Incompressible and compressible fluid flow fundamentals. Dimensional analysis and similitude. Internal and external flow applications. Lab experiments emphasizing concepts in thermodynamics and fluid flow. Written reports are required."Fundamentals of design, selection, and operation of components of measuring systems. Measurement processes, data acquisition systems, analysis of data, and propagation of measurement uncertainty."Summer professional work period."Professional work period, one semester maximum per academic year."Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Fundamentals of sensor characterization, signal conditioning and motion control, coupled with concepts of embedded computer control. Digital and analog components used for interfacing with computer controlled systems. Mechanical system analysis combined with various control approaches. Focus on automation of hydraulic actuation processes. Laboratory experiences provide hands-on development of mechanical systems.""Methods and principles of automatic control. Pneumatic, hydraulic, and electrical systems. Representative applications of automatic control systems. Mathematical analysis of control systems.""The study of ethics in engineering design and the engineering profession. A comprehensive look at when ethical decisions must be made and an approach to make them. The approach takes into account moral, legal, technical, experiential, and standards to aid in ethical decision making. Each area will be studied through lectures, debates, guest speakers, class discussion, and case studies."Properties of hydraulic fluids. Performance parameters of fixed and variable displacement pumps and motors. Hydraulic circuits and systems. Hydrostatic transmissions. Characteristics of control valves. Analysis and design of hydraulic systems for power and control functions."Mechanical Engineering Capstone Design course. Team approach to solving design problems involving mechanical systems.  Teams will use current design practices they will encounter in industry.  Document decisions concerning form and function, material specification, manufacturing methods, safety, cost, and conformance with codes and standards. Solution description includes oral and written reports.  Projects often worked with industry sponsors.""Stress life, strain life, and fracture mechanics approaches to fatigue life and design with metals, polymers and ceramics.  Introduction to material selection in design of machine components.  Thermal and structural considerations in design of machine components and hybrid materials.  Course project and relevant literature review required for graduate credit.""Three dimensional kinematics, dynamics, and control of robot manipulators, hardware elements and sensors. Laboratory experiments using industrial robots.""Theory and applications of computer- aided design. Computer graphics programming, solid modeling, assembly modeling, and finite element modeling. Mechanical simulation, process engineering, rapid prototyping and manufacturing integration.""Modeling and simulation of mechanical, electrical, fluid, and/or thermal systems.  Development of equations of motion and dynamic response characteristics in time and frequency domains.  Fundamentals of classical control applications, including mathematical analysis and design for closed loop control systems.  Introduction to computer interfacing for simulation, data acquisition, and control.  Laboratory exercises for hands-on system investigation and control implementation.""Broad exposure to the study of creativity, both in scientific research and in engineering design practice. Exploration of the subject includes readings from a variety of fields; in-class discussion and activities; and individual and team projects that enable students to develop their creativity. Graduate students also will do independent research on creativity and develop a related teaching module.""Optimization involves finding the 'best' according to specified criteria. Review of a range of optimization methods from traditional nonlinear to modern evolutionary methods such as Genetic algorithms. Examination of how these methods can be used to solve a wide variety of design problems across disciplines, including mechanical systems design, biomedical device design, biomedical imaging, and interaction with digital medical data. Students will gain knowledge of numerical optimization algorithms and sufficient understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of these algorithms to apply them appropriately in engineering design. Experience includes code writing and off-the-shelf routines. Numerous case-studies of real-world situations in which problems were modeled and solved using advanced optimization techniques.""Basic principles, performance, and cost analysis of alternative energy systems including biofuels, bioenergy, wind, solar, fuel cells, storage and other alternative energy systems. Performance analysis and operating principles of systems and components, and economic analysis for system design and operation will be taught. Emphasis is on alternative energy technologies needed to meet our future energy needs at various scales ranging from household to city to national levels.""Heat transfer by conduction, convection, and radiation. Similarity concepts in heat, mass, and momentum transfer. Methods for determination of heat transfer coefficients. Combined modes of heat transfer. Heat exchangers. Lab experiments emphasizing concepts in thermodynamics and heat transfer. Written reports are required.""Introduction to the fundamentals of combustion and the analysis of combustion systems for gaseous, liquid, and solid fuels-including biomass fuels. Combustion fundamentals are applied to the analysis of engines; turbines, biomass cookstoves; suspension, fixed-bed, and fluidized-bed furnaces; and other combustion devices.""Space conditioning and moist air processes. Application of thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid flow principles to the analysis of heating, ventilating, and air conditioning components and systems. Performance and specification of components and systems.""Design criteria and assessment of building environment and energy requirements. Design of heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems. System control and economic analysis. Oral and written reports required.""Basic principles, thermodynamics, engineering analysis of power plant systems. Topics include existing power plant technologies, the advanced energyplex systems of the future, societal impacts of power production, and environmental and regulatory concerns."Applications of principles of fluid mechanics and thermodynamics in performance analysis and design of turbomachines. Conceptual and preliminary design of axial and radial flow compressors and turbines using velocity triangles and through-flow approaches."Basic principles, thermodynamics, combustion, and exhaust emissions of spark-ignition and compression-ignition engines. Laboratory determination of fuel properties and engine performance. Effects of engine components and operating conditions on performance. Written reports required.""Properties of sounds waves and noise metrics (pressure, power levels, etc). Sound sources and propagation. Principles of wave propagation in one-, two-, and three-dimensions. Wave reflection and transmission. Wave propagation in rectangular, cylindrical, and annular ducts. Acoustics fields for model noise sources. Introduction to aerodynamic noise sources in aircraft, aircraft engines, and wind turbines. Selected laboratory experiments.""Broad exposure to the study of creativity, both in scientific research and in engineering design practice. Exploration of the subject includes readings from a variety of fields; in-class discussion and activities; and individual and team projects that enable students to develop their creativity. Graduate students also will do independent research on creativity and develop a related teaching module.""Application of team design concepts to projects of a multidisciplinary nature. Concurrent treatment of design, manufacturing and life cycle considerations. Application of design tools such as CAD, CAM and FEM. Design methodologies, project scheduling, cost estimating, quality control, manufacturing processes. Development of a prototype and appropriate documentation in the form of written reports, oral presentations, computer models and engineering drawings.""Build and test of a conceptual design. Detail design, manufacturability, test criteria and procedures. Application of design tools such as CAD and CAM and manufacturing techniques such as rapid prototyping. Development and testing of a full-scale prototype with appropriate documentation in the form of design journals, written reports, oral presentations and computer models and engineering drawings.""Introduction to computer solution techniques required to simulate flow, thermal, and mechanical systems. Methods of solving ordinary and partial differential equations and systems of algebraic equations; interpolation, numerical integration; finite difference and finite element methods."Scientific principles and quantitative methods concerning sustainability. Analysis of environmental issues associated with engineering design and product manufacturing in an economic and social context. Heuristic and analytical methods for assessing the sustainability of existing or potential product/service designs. Application to a design problem in teams."Cross-disciplinary examination of the present and future impact of globalization with a focus on preparing students for leadership roles in diverse professional, social, and cultural contexts.  Facilitate an understanding of the threats and opportunities inherent in the globalization process as they are perceived by practicing professionals and articulated in debates on globalization. Use of a digital forum for presenting and analyzing globalization issues by on-campus and off-campus specialists.""Hands-on design experience utilizing knowledge acquired in core mechanical engineering courses. Emphasis with engineering problem formulation and solution, oral and written communication, team decision-making and ethical conduct. Design projects include engineering considerations in appropriate technology which have multidisciplinary components in economics and sociology."Investigation of topics holding special interest of students and faculty. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty.Investigation of topics holding special interest of students and faculty. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty.Investigation of topics holding special interest of students and faculty. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty.Investigation of topics holding special interest of students and faculty. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty.Investigation of topics holding special interest of student and faculty. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty.Investigation of topics holding special interest of student and faculty. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty.Investigation of topics holding special interest of student and faculty. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty.Investigation of topics holding special interest of student and faculty. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty.Investigation of topics holding special interest of student and faculty. Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty.Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Economics and policy for U.S. energy systems, with an emphasis on connections to engineering. Topics include: economic analysis of conventional energy commodity markets and technologies, deregulated electricity markets, and emerging energy technologies; demand forecasting; economic and environmental policy in energy; integrated assessment; and semester-specific contemporary issues.   Economics majors may not apply this course towards graduation.""Application of control design methods using continuous, discrete, and frequency-based models. Approaches include classical, pole assignment, model reference, internal model, and adaptive control methods. Mechanical design projects.""Stress life, strain life, and fracture mechanics approaches to fatigue life and design with metals, polymers and ceramics.  Introduction to material selection in design of machine components.  Thermal and structural considerations in design of machine components and hybrid materials.  Course project and relevant literature review required for graduate credit.""Three dimensional kinematics, dynamics, and control of robot manipulators, hardware elements and sensors. Laboratory experiments using industrial robots.""Integration of materials, design and manufacturing. Materials selection. Design for assembly and manufacturing (DFMA). Design and redesign to facilitate cost-effective manufacturing using material selection and DFMA software.""Effect of chemical structure and morphology on properties. Linear viscoelasticity, damping and stress relaxation phenomena. Structure and mechanics of filler and fiber reinforced composites. Mechanical properties and failure mechanisms. Material selection and designing with polymers. Processing of polymer and composite parts.""Broad exposure to the study of creativity, both in scientific research and in engineering design practice. Exploration of the subject includes readings from a variety of fields; in-class discussion and activities; and individual and team projects that enable students to develop their creativity. Graduate students also will do independent research on creativity and develop a related teaching module.""Optimization involves finding the 'best' according to specified criteria. Review of a range of optimization methods from traditional nonlinear to modern evolutionary methods such as Genetic algorithms. Examination of how these methods can be used to solve a wide variety of design problems across disciplines, including mechanical systems design, biomedical device design, biomedical imaging, and interaction with digital medical data. Students will gain knowledge of numerical optimization algorithms and sufficient understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of these algorithms to apply them appropriately in engineering design. Experience includes code writing and off-the-shelf routines. Numerous case-studies of real-world situations in which problems were modeled and solved using advanced optimization techniques."Mechanics of material removal for ductile materials. Shear zone theory. Oblique cutting. Heat transfer in machining. Milling and grinding. Mechanics of material removal for brittle materials. Optimal selection and design of cutting parameters. Control of machining processes. Principles of precision finishing. Design considerations for machining and finishing processes."Concepts and applications of micro/nanotechnology appropriate to the manufacturing field.  An overview of micro/nano-fabrication techniques including mechanical, EDM, laser and lithography.  MEMS device fabrication. Scaling laws. Top down and bottom up approaches of nanomanufacturing.  Experimental or theoretical project leading to potential submission of a manuscript for journal or conference."Fundamentals of thermodynamics from the classical viewpoint with emphasis on the use of the first and second laws for analysis of thermal systems. Generalized thermodynamic relationships. Computer applications of thermodynamic properties and system analysis. Selected topics."Introduction to energy systems including economic and thermodynamic principles. Various production systems will be analyzed. Application to transportation and building systems will be emphasized. Sustainability, climate change and other current energy system topics.""Thermodynamics of compressible flow. Viscous and inviscid compressible flow equations. One dimensional steady flow; isentropic flow, shocks, expansions. Multidimensional compressible flow aspects. Linear and nonlinear wave analysis and method of characteristics. Subsonic, transonic, supersonic and hypersonic flows.""Introduction to thermal and catalytic processes for the conversion of biomass to biofuels and other biobased products. Topics include gasification, fast pyrolysis, hydrothermal processing, syngas to synfuels, and bio-oil upgrading. Application of thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid dynamics to bioenergy and biofuels.""Advanced treatment of heat transmission by conduction, convection, and radiation.""Detailed analysis of incompressible/compressible, viscous/inviscid, laminar/turbulent, and developing fluid flows on a particle/point control volume basis.""Fundamentals of heat transfer in nanoscale systems, ballistic and diffusive transport, heat conduction due to photons and electrons. Wave and particle nature of energy transfer. Basics of nanoscale thermal radiation. Size effects and transport characteristics for solids, liquids and gases. Computational methodologies and measurement techniques for thermal properties.""Thermochemistry and transport theory applied to combustion. Gas phase equilibrium. Energy balances. Reaction kinetics. Flame temperatures, speed, ignition, and extinction. Premixed and diffusion flames. Combustion aerodynamics. Mechanisms of air pollution.""Vibrations of continuous systems. Nonlinear vibration phenomena, perturbation expansions; methods of multiple time scales and slowly-varying amplitude and phase. Characteristics of random vibrations; random processes, probability distributions, spectral density and its significance, the normal or Gaussian random process. Transmission of random vibration, response of simple single and two-degree-of-freedom systems to stationary random excitation. Fatigue failure due to random excitation.""Integrating thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, and heat transfer to model thermal equipment and to simulate thermal systems. Second law and parametric analysis; cost estimation, life cycle analysis and optimization. Some computer programming required.""Basic concepts of discretization, consistency, and stability. Explicit and implicit methods for ordinary differential equations. Methods for each type of partial differential equation.  Iterative solution methods; curvilinear grids. Students will program basic algorithms.""Application of computational methods to current problems in fluid mechanics and heat transfer. Methods for solving the Navier-Stokes and reduced equation sets such as the Euler, boundary layer, and parabolized forms of the conservation equations. Introduction to relevant aspects of grid generation and turbulence modeling.""Theoretical acoustics: wave propagation in fluids; acoustic radiation, diffraction and scattering; nonlinear acoustics; radiation force; cavitation; and ray acoustics.""Broad exposure to the study of creativity, both in scientific research and in engineering design practice. Exploration of the subject includes readings from a variety of fields; in-class discussion and activities; and individual and team projects that enable students to develop their creativity. Graduate students also will do independent research on creativity and develop a related teaching module.""Fundamentals of computer graphics technology. Data structures. Parametric curve and surface modeling. Solid model representations. Applications in engineering design, analysis, and manufacturing.""Introduction to the scanning probe microscope (SPM, also known as atomic force microscope or AFM) and associated measurement techniques. Overview or instrumentation system, basic principles of operation, probe-sample interaction and various operational modes to obtain micro/nanoscale structure and force spectroscopy of material surfaces. Examples of SPM significance and applications in science and engineering research, nanotechnology and other industries. Laboratory work involving use of a scanning probe microscope system is an integral part of the course.""Review of Fundamentals: (Elasticity, Electromagnetism, Mechanical response), Mechanics of thermally, electrostatically and magnetically actuated microsystems, Mechanics and design of nanostructured materials, mechanics of surface stress engineering and its implications to sensors and thin film structures.""Materials and mechanics approach to fracture and fatigue. Fracture mechanics, brittle and ductile fracture, fracture and fatigue characteristics, fracture of thin films and layered structures. Fracture and fatigue tests, mechanics and materials designed to avoid fracture or fatigue."Continuum thermodynamics and kinetics approaches to phase transformations.  Phase field approach to stress- and temperature-induced martensitic transformations and twinning at the nanoscale. Nucleation and growth. Nanostructural evaluation. Analytical and numerical solutions. Surface stresses and energy. Surface-induced phase transformations. Large Strain formulation.Elementary notions of probability. Random processes. Autocorrelation and spectral functions. Estimation of spectrum from finite data. Response of linear systems to random inputs. Discrete and continuous Kalman filter theory and applications. Smoothing and prediction. Linearization of nonlinear dynamics."The optimal control problem. Variational approach. Pontryagin's principle, Hamilton-Jacobi equation. Dynamic programming. Time-optimal, minimum fuel, minimum energy control systems. The regulator problem. Structures and properties of optimal controls.""Introduction to modern robust control. Model and signal uncertainty in control systems. Uncertainty description. Stability and performance robustness to uncertainty. Solutions to the H2, Hoo, and l1 control problems. Tools for robustness analysis and synthesis.""Sampled data, discrete data, and the z-transform. Design of digital control systems using transform methods: root locus, frequency response and direct design methods. Design using state-space methods. Controllability, observability, pole placement, state estimators. Digital filters in control systems. Microcomputer implementation of digital filters. Finite wordlength effects. Linear quadratic optimal control in digital control systems. Simulation of digital control systems."Linear algebra review. Least square method and singular value decomposition. State space modeling of linear continuous-time systems. Solution of linear systems. Controllability and observability. Canonical description of linear equations. Stability of linear systems. State feedback and pole placements. Observer design for linear systems.Linear vs nonlinear systems. Phase plane analysis. Bifurcation and center manifold theory. Lyapunov stability. Absolute stability of feedback systems. Input-output stability. Passivity theory and feedback linearization. Nonlinear control design techniques."A systematic introduction to the underpinnings of Virtual Environments (VE), Virtual Worlds, advanced displays and immersive technologies; and an overview of some of the applications areas particularly virtual engineering.""Cross-disciplinary examination of the present and future impact of globalization with a focus on preparing students for leadership roles in diverse professional, social, and cultural contexts.  Facilitate an understanding of the threats and opportunities inherent in the globalization process as they are perceived by practicing professionals and articulated in debates on globalization. Use of a digital forum for presenting and analyzing globalization issues by on-campus and off-campus specialists."(1-0).Theory and implementation of contemporary parametric sculptured surface modeling technology. Non-uniform rational B-spline (NURBS) curves and surfaces. Fundamental computational algorithms. Construction techniques. Advanced modeling topics. Computer projects."Single particle, mutliparticle and two-phase fluid flow phenomena (gas-solid, liquid-solid and gas-liquid mixtures); particle interactions, transport phenomena, wall effects; bubbles, equations of multiphase flow. Dense phase (fluidized and packed beds) and ducted flows; momentum, heat and mass transfer. Computer solutions."Convection heat transfer to internal or external flows under laminar or turbulent conditions. Dimensionless parameters. Classical solutions of Newtonian viscous flows. Forced and free convection. Special topics.Techniques for analysis of radiation in enclosures. Radiative properties of surfaces. Radiative transfer in participating media. Combined modes of transfer. Approximate methods of analysis.An examination of current methods in computational fluid dynamics. Differencing strategies. Advanced solution algorithms for unstructured meshes.  Grid generation. Construction of higher-order CFD algorithms. Parallel computing. Current applications. Use of state of the art CFD codes.Investigation of advanced topics of special interest to graduate students in mechanical engineering.Investigation of advanced topics of special interest to graduate students in mechanical engineering.Investigation of advanced topics of special interest to graduate students in mechanical engineering.Investigation of advanced topics of special interest to graduate students in mechanical engineering.Investigation of Special Topics: Biological and Nanoscale Sciences of special interest to graduate students in mechanical engineering.Investigation of Special Topics: Complex Fluid Systems of special interest to graduate students in mechanical engineering.Investigation of Special Topics: Clean Energy Technologies of special interest to graduate students in mechanical engineering.Investigation of Design & Manufacturing Innovation of special interest to graduate students in mechanical engineering.Investigation of Special Topics: Simulation and Visualization of special interest to graduate students in mechanical engineering.One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Understanding of atmospheric processes that play a role in creating severe and hazardous weather. Focus on thunderstorms, tornadoes, hurricanes, floods, blizzards, ice storms, and temperature extremes. Impacts on lives and property."Current weather discussions and introduction to synoptic-scale interpretation of meteorology. Application and use of calculus in meteorology. Course restricted to majors. Others with permission of instructor."Orientation course for students enrolled in the Earth, Wind and Fire Learning Community. Provides an introduction to Iowa State University and meteorology, geology, and Earth science programs for students enrolled in the department's learning community. Activities include academic and social activities, talks and presentations on academic success, resume writing, and study abroad, as well as research talks by faculty members.""Study of the occurrence, history, development, and management of world water resources.  Basic hydrologic principles including climate, surface water, groundwater, and water quality.  Historical and current perspectives on water policy, use, and the role of water in society and the environment.""An overview of the atmospheric sciences, the meteorology program at Iowa State, and the major research journals used in the discipline.""Basic concepts in weather and climate, including atmospheric measurements, radiation, stability, precipitation, winds, fronts, forecasting, and severe weather. Applied topics include global warming, ozone depletion, world climates and weather safety.""An introduction to computer programming using FORTRAN with focus on meteorological applications. Emphasis on basics of good programming techniques and style through extensive practice in top-down design, writing, running, and debugging small programs. Topics include operations and functions, selective execution, repetitive execution, arrays, input/output, file processing, and subprograms.  This course is designed for majors.""Engineering aspects of scientific balloon flights. Integration of science mission objectives with engineering requirements. Operations team certification. FAA and FCC regulations, communications, and command systems. Flight path prediction and control."Independent study for freshman and sophomore students.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing the work period."Global distribution of temperature, wind, and atmospheric constituents; atmospheric thermodynamics, radiative transfer, global energy balance, storms and clouds, introductory dynamics."Concepts of weather map plotting and analysis. Introduction to forecasting and to the use of real-time UNIDATA computer products."Supervised practical experience in a professional meteorological agency. Experiences may include providing weather information for radio, TV, utilities, government agencies, construction, or agribusiness.""Renewable and non-renewable energy resources. Origin, occurrence, and extraction of fossil fuels. Nuclear, wind, geothermal, biomass, hydroelectric, and solar energy. Biofuels. Energy efficiency. Environmental effects of energy production and use, including air pollution, acid precipitation, coal ash, mountaintop removal mining, oil drilling, hydraulic fracturing, groundwater contamination, nuclear waste disposal, and global climate change. Carbon sequestration and geoengineering solutions for reducing atmospheric CO2 concentrations.""Basic laws of thermodynamics, thermodynamics of water vapor, mixtures of gases, stability, hydrostatics, cloud physics.""Precipitation physics, radar, atmospheric radiation, atmospheric optics, atmospheric electricity."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing the work period."Examination of watersheds as systems, emphasizing the surface components of the hydrologic cycle.  Combines qualitative understanding of hydrological processes and uncertainty with quantitative representation.  Laboratory emphasizes field investigation and measurement of watershed processes.""Recent changes in global biogeochemical cycles and climate; models of future changes in the climate system; impacts of global change on agriculture, water resources and human health; ethical issues of global environmental change.  Also offered online Alt. F, even-numbered years.""A description of the physical microenvironment in which organisms live. Emphasis on the movement of energy (heat and radiation) and mass (water and carbon) among organisms, the soil, and atmosphere.  Applications to humans, other animals, plants, and plant communities.""Distribution and causes of different climates around the world. Effects of climate and climate variations on human activities including society, economy and agriculture. Current issues such as climate change and international efforts to assess and mitigate the consequences of a changing climate.  Semester project and in-class presentation required.""Physical nature and practical consequences of mesoscale atmospheric phenomena. Mesoscale convective systems, fronts, terrain-forced circulations. Observation, analysis, and prediction of mesoscale atmospheric structure."Current weather forecasting and discussion. Applications of atmospheric physics and dynamics in real-time weather situations. Use of UNIDATA computer products."Study of the basic principles of hydrologic modeling, including rainfall-runoff analysis, lumped and distributed modeling, conceptual and physical models, parameter estimation and sensitivity analysis, input and validation data, uncertainty analysis, and the use of models in surface water hydrology. A range of common models are applied to study hydrologic topics such as flood forecasting and land use change impacts. Previous experience with Matlab or other programming language is needed.""Real-time computer analysis of current weather, with emphasis on small-scale features. Studies of severe weather, lake-effect snow, CSI, cold-air damming.""Principles of meteorological sensing and data analysis. Thermometry, barometry, hygrometry, anemometry, precipitation measurements, radiometry, radar, remote sensing, visibility, and cloud height. Calibration and measurement uncertainties. Digital signal processing. Field trip to the National Weather Service. Labs emphasize dataloggers and modern weather stations.""Fundamentals of radar meteorology with emphasis on applications. Topics presented include theory of radar, engineering principles, Doppler radar, polarimetric radar, and applications to remote sensing of clouds and precipitation.""Conservation laws, governing equations, circulation and vorticity. Development of quasi-geostrophic theory.""Developing and working with climate models based on fundamental physical principles that govern the climate systems of the Earth and other planets. Emphasis on coupled, nonlinear-system interactions of physical processes such as circulation dynamics, radiative transfer, and cloud/precipitation physics, starting with fairly simple 0- and 1-dimensional analytical and numerical models based on energy, mass, and momentum conservation. Observational study of seasonally evolving weather patterns that form climates around the world.""Planetary boundary layer, linear perturbation theory, atmospheric wave motions, baroclinic and convective instability, mesoscale circulations.""Development of meteorological theories and numerical weather prediction, discoveries of important meteorological phenomena, and impact of weather and climate on important historical events.""Electromagnetic-radiation principles, active and passive sensors, multispectral and hyperspectral sensors, imaging radar, SAR, thermal imaging, lidar. Examples of applications. Also offered online S."Processing and analysis of satellite sensor data (optical and radar). Provides practical applications in an environmental context.No more than 9 credits in Mteor 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits in Mteor 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits in Mteor 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits in Mteor 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits in Mteor 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits in Mteor 490 may be counted toward graduation.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period.Required of all senior meteorology majors. Research projects in collaboration with faculty. Written and oral presentations of results at the end of the semester."Examination of watersheds as systems, emphasizing the surface components of the hydrologic cycle.  Combines qualitative understanding of hydrological processes and uncertainty with quantitative representation.  Laboratory emphasizes field investigation and measurement of watershed processes.""Recent changes in global biogeochemical cycles and climate; models of future changes in the climate system; impacts of global change on agriculture, water resources and human health; ethical issues of global environmental change.  Also offered online Alt. F, even-numbered years.""A description of the physical microenvironment in which organisms live. Emphasis on the movement of energy (heat and radiation) and mass (water and carbon) among organisms, the soil, and atmosphere.  Applications to humans, other animals, plants, and plant communities.""Gallus. The physical nature and practical consequences of mesoscale atmospheric phenomena. Mesoscale convective systems, fronts, terrain-forced circulations. Observation, analysis, and prediction of mesoscale atmospheric structure. Semester project and in-class presentation required."Current weather forecasting and discussion. Applications of atmospheric physics and dynamics in real-time weather situations. Use of UNIDATA computer products."Study of the basic principles of hydrologic modeling, including rainfall-runoff analysis, lumped and distributed modeling, conceptual and physical models, parameter estimation and sensitivity analysis, input and validation data, uncertainty analysis, and the use of models in surface water hydrology. A range of common models are applied to study hydrologic topics such as flood forecasting and land use change impacts. Previous experience with Matlab or other programming language is needed.""Microwave remote sensing of Earth's surface and atmosphere using satellite-based or ground-based instruments. Specific examples include remote sensing of atmospheric temperature and water vapor, precipitation, ocean salinity, and soil moisture.""Planetary atmospheres, radiative equilibrium models, radiative transfer, the upper atmosphere, remote sounding from satellites.""The first half of a two semester sequence. Governing equations, scale analysis, simple types of wave motion in the atmosphere, instability theory.""Continuation of 543. General circulation and dynamics of zonally symmetric circulations, atmospheric energetics, nonlinear dynamics of planetary waves.""Developing and working with climate models based on fundamental physical principles that govern the climate systems of the Earth and other planets. Emphasis on coupled, nonlinear-system interactions of physical processes such as circulation dynamics, radiative transfer, and cloud/precipitation physics, starting with fairly simple 0- and 1-dimensional analytical and numerical models based on energy, mass, and momentum conservation. Observational study of seasonally evolving weather patterns that form climates around the world.""Development of meteorological theories and numerical weather prediction, discoveries of important meteorological phenomena, and impact of weather and climate on important historical events.""Electromagnetic-radiation principles, active and passive sensors, multispectral and hyperspectral sensors, imaging radar, SAR, thermal imaging, lidar. Examples of applications. Also offered online S."Processing and analysis of satellite sensor data (optical and radar). Provides practical applications in an environmental context.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Weekly seminar on topics of current research interest. All students seeking a graduate degree in geology must enroll during each semester of residence. Students pursuing a non-thesis option for the M.S. in Earth Science must enroll for one semester.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Weekly seminar on topics of current research interest. All students seeking a graduate degree in geology must enroll during each semester of residence. Students pursuing a non-thesis option for the M.S. in Earth Science must enroll for one semester.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Attendance only. Weekly seminar on topics of current research interest. All students seeking a graduate degree in geology must enroll during each semester of residence. Students pursuing a non-thesis option for the M.S. in Earth Science must enroll for one semester.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Atmospheric boundary-layer structure and dynamics. Diurnal and seasonal variations, turbulent fluxes and turbulence kinetic energy. Measurements and empirical relations for wind and temperature near the ground. Numerical simulation and applications to wind energy.""Introduction to the importance of viruses, bacteria, fungi, archaea and parasites both to humans and to the biosphere. Topics include past and present microbial impact on humans and society, ecology and diversity of microbes, biotechnology and microbial impact on the biosphere.""An introduction to curriculum and research opportunities in microbiology at Iowa State.  Topics include: easing the transition to life as a university student, development of specific goals, strengthening interpersonal communication, professional portfolio creation and resume building.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Selected topics in microbiology with emphasis on the relationship of microorganisms to human and animal health, agricultural technology, and the environment. With written petition to the chair of the supervisory committee, students who obtain a grade of B or better may substitute 201 for MICRO 302 in advanced courses.""Basic microbiology laboratory techniques for non-microbiology majors.   Credit for either Micro 201L or 302L, but not both, may be applied toward graduation.""Basic cell biology, physiology, metabolism, genetics and ecology of microorganisms, with an emphasis on  prokaryotes and viruses, as well as the roles of microorganisms in the environment, disease, agriculture, and industry.""Basic microbiology laboratory techniques for majors in microbiology, biological sciences and related fields.   Credit for either Micro 201L or 302L, but not both, may be applied toward graduation."Study of infection by bacterial and viral pathogenic agents of humans with an overview of immune responses in controlling disease."Microbiological tools and techniques to isolate, identify, and characterize medically significant microorganisms in relation to human diseases. Emphasis on the virulence factors of pathogenic organisms as compared to the normal flora.""Introductory course integrating physiological and genetic principles influencing bacterial growth, survival, and cellular   differentiation.  Emphasis is on prokaryotes although unicellular eukaryotes are also discussed. Topics include the structure,   function, and assembly of cell components, bioenergetics and metabolism, regulation of gene expression, genetic adaptation, stress   tolerance, biofilms, and cell-cell interactions and communication.""Analysis of genome, RNA, and protein data using computer technology to answer biological questions on topics ranging from microbial diversity to human health. An introduction for students in the life sciences to the fields of genomics, bioinformatics and systems.""Biology and host-parasite relationships of major groups of animal parasites, and techniques of diagnosing and studying parasites.""Identification, biology, and significance of insects and arthropods that affect the health of humans and animals, particularly those that are vectors of disease.""Laboratory and field techniques for studying medical or public health entomology, including: collection, identification and maintenance of medically significant arthropods and experimental design and execution related to the biology of arthropods or arthropod-pathogen interactions."Introduction to the structure and function of natural environmental systems. Emphasis on the analysis of material and energy flows in natural environmental systems and the primary environmental factors controlling these systems."The fundamental concepts of bacterial and bacteriophage genetics including mutagenesis, mechanisms of both vertical and horizontal genetic information transfer, gene regulation, and genetic approaches to study complex cellular processes. Review and discussion of research literature to examine experimental design, methodology, and interpretation of both historical and contemporary relevance to microbial genetics.""Examination of the various factors in the production of foods of animal origin, from animal production through processing, distribution and final consumption which contribute to the overall microbiological safety of the food. The two modules of this course will be 1) the procedures and processes which can affect the overall microbiological safety of the food, and 2) the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) system.""The molecular virology and epidemiology of human, animal, plant and insect viruses.""Overview of insect-virus interactions including insect immunity to viruses, genetic enhancement of viral insecticides, transgenic mosquitoes, disruption of virus transmission, and the role of insect and virus genomics in combating viral disease of both human and agricultural importance.""Pathogenesis of human microbiological foodborne infections and intoxications, principles of toxicology, major classes of toxicants in the food supply, governmental regulation of foodborne hazards. Assessed service learning component.   Only one of FS HN 419 and FS HN 519 may count toward graduation.""Effects of microbial growth in foods. Methods to control, detect, and enumerate microorganisms in food and water. Foodborne infections and intoxications."Standard techniques used for the microbiological examination of foods. Independent and group projects on student-generated questions in food microbiology. Emphasis on oral and written communication and group interaction."Survey of the diverse groups of procaryotes emphasizing important and distinguishing metabolic, phylogenetic, morphological, and ecological features of members of those groups.""Fundamental techniques and theory for studying the cellular mechanisms and diversity of microbial life. Experimental   techniques will include isolation and physiological characterization of bacteria that inhabit different environments. Also included are   techniques for phylogenetic characterization, measuring gene expression, and genetic manipulation of diverse species of bacteria. Essential components for the effective communication of scientific results are also emphasized.""Required of all undergraduate majors in microbiology. Students demonstrate mastery of core courses in microbiology through discussion of current literature in microbiology and immunology, issues in scientific conduct, and bioethics in microbiology. Students present current papers in a journal club format and gain experience in writing and reviewing grant proposals.""Preparations for graduation. Topics include job search strategies, career information, mock interviews, graduate and professional school application processes and guidelines as well as outcomes assessment activities.""Morphology, diversity, and ecology of fungi; their relation to agriculture, industry, and human health.""An examination of humoral and cellular immune function as well as the interaction of the cells and factors of the immune system that result in health and disease. MICRO 475L optional.   Credit for either Micro 475 or V MPM 520, but not both, may be applied to graduation.""Techniques in primary culture and tumor cell growth, measures of lymphocyte function, serological techniques and flow cytometry. Half semester course.""Overview of plant-associated bacteria including their ecology, diversity, and the physiological and molecular mechanisms involved with their interactions with plants. The course covers bacterial plant pathogens and pathogenesis, nitrogen fixation and plant symbioses, biological control and plant growth promotion, bacterial disease diagnosis and management, and approaches to the study of microbial communities in the rhizosphere and on leaves.""The living organisms in the soil and what they do. Emphasis on soil biota composition, the carbon cycle and bioremediation, soil-plant-microbial relationships, and environmental issues."Introduction to major functional groups of autotrophic and heterotrophic microorganisms and their roles in natural systems.A maximum of 6 credits of Micro 490 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.A maximum of 6 credits of Micro 490 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.Participation in the Cooperative Extension Intern Program or an equivalent work experience. Written report of activities required.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."The fundamental concepts of bacterial and bacteriophage genetics including mutagenesis, mechanisms of both vertical and horizontal genetic information transfer, gene regulation, and genetic approaches to study complex cellular processes. Review and discussion of research literature to examine experimental design, methodology, and interpretation of both historical and contemporary relevance to microbial genetics.""Examination of the various factors in the production of foods of animal origin, from animal production through processing, distribution and final consumption which contribute to the overall microbiological safety of the food. The two modules of this course will be 1) the procedures and processes which can affect the overall microbiological safety of the food, and 2) the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) system.""Overview of insect-virus interactions including insect immunity to viruses, genetic enhancement of viral insecticides, transgenic mosquitoes, disruption of virus transmission, and the role of insect and virus genomics in combating viral disease of both human and agricultural importance.""Overview of commensal microbiota in the health and well-being of vertebrates. Topics include diversity of intestinal structure, microbial diversity/function, innate immune development, community interactions and metabolic diseases associated with alterations of the intestinal microbiome.""Survey of the diverse groups of procaryotes emphasizing important and distinguishing metabolic, phylogenetic, morphological, and ecological features of members of those groups."Basic concepts and contemporary topics in genetic regulation of livestock immune response and disease resistance."Comparisons among the three kingdoms of life (Bacterica, Archaea, and Eukarya). Topics will include metabolism, adaptation, methods of phylogenetic analysis, and comparative genomics."Review of genetics and selected physiological topics of model bacteria."Review and contrast/comparison of common bacterial pathogens of plants and animals and their mechanisms of virulence, including   toxins, protein secretion, host invasion and iron acquisition strategies. An overview of eukaryotic cell biology that is relevant to   pathogenesis will also be included.""Introduction to virus life cycles including entry, gene expression strategies, replication, and mechanisms to modify and overcome   host defenses.  The roles of specific viruses and sub-viral agents in animal and plant disease will also be included.""Ecology, genetics, physiology and diversity of fungi, from yeasts to mushrooms, and their importance in human affairs.""The study of microorganisms in their natural environments, with a focus on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, including eukaryotic hosts; interactions within biofilms and communities, including intercellular communication and symbioses; microbial adaptations to extreme environments; and metagemomic, genomic, molecular and microscopy techniques for the study of microbes in natural systems.""An examination of humoral and cellular immune function as well as the interaction of the cells and factors of the immune system that result in health and disease. MICRO 475L optional.   Credit for either Micro 575 or V MPM 520, but not both, may be applied toward graduation.""Overview of plant-associated bacteria including their ecology, diversity, and the physiological and molecular mechanisms involved with their interactions with plants. The course covers bacterial plant pathogens and pathogenesis, nitrogen fixation and plant symbioses, biological control and plant growth promotion, bacterial disease diagnosis and management, and approaches to the study of microbial communities in the rhizosphere and on leaves.""The living organisms in the soil and what they do. Emphasis on soil biota composition, the carbon cycle and bioremediation, soil-plant-microbial relationships, and environmental issues.""Bacteria associated with diseases of vertebrates, including virulence factors and interaction of host responses."Introduction to major functional groups of autotrophic and heterotrophic microorganisms and their roles in natural systems."Course will expose students to the breadth of subdisciplines within microbiology, offer opportunities for direct interaction between the students and the faculty members within the Interdepartmental Microbiology Graduate Program, and promote interactions among the students within the program.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Advanced study of virus host-cell interactions. Molecular mechanisms of viral replication and pathogenesis.Current topics in molecular aspects of immunology: T and B cell receptors; major histocompatibility complex; antibody structure; immunosuppressive drugs and viruses; and intracellular signaling pathways leading to expression of genes that control and activate immune function."Review of current concepts in specific areas of microbial pathogenesis including the genetic basis for bacterial disease, genetic regulation and control of virulence factors and their mechanisms of action, and host-pathogen interactions at the cellular and molecular levels. The application of microbial genetics to understanding pathogenesis will be included.""Topics of current interest in food microbiology, including new foodborne pathogens, rapid identification methods, effect of food properties and new preservation techniques on microbial growth, and mode of action of antimicrobials.""Provides an overview of rapid microbial detection methods for use in foods. Topics include historical aspects of rapid microbial detection, basic categories of rapid tests (phenotypic, genotypic, whole cell, etc.), existing commercial test formats and kits, automation in testing, sample preparation and ""next generation"" testing formats now in development."Chemistry of soil organic matter and biochemical transformations brought about by microorganisms and enzymes in soils.Colloquia or advanced study of specific topics in a specialized field.Colloquia or advanced study of specific topics in a specialized field.Colloquia or advanced study of specific topics in a specialized field.Colloquia or advanced study of specific topics in a specialized field."Seminal and current research in molecular and physiological aspects of plant interactions with pathogens,     including mechanisms of pathogenesis, host-pathogen recognition and host defense, with an emphasis on critical evaluation of     primary literature.  Students also complete a research proposal writing and peer review exercise."Graduate research projects performed under the supervision of selected faculty members in the Interdepartmental Microbiology major.Student and faculty presentations.Examines the role of a Cadet in the Army Reserve Officer Training Corps and a Lieutenant in the United States Army. The course explores a military culture whose ultimate success is determined by the character and proficiency of its' leaders. Instruction introduces students to the cultural heritage and history of the U.S. Army. Students will begin to understand the structure of the U.S. Army and how it functions as an organization and institution. The curriculum promotes the development of students' communication skills to enhance their ability to transmit ideas. The class examines how the Army's cultural values drive the development of leadership in the Officer Corps. Hands-on activities enable students to gain insight on the skills and abilities required of cadets and officers interacting with civilians and soldiers."Uses basic military training, missions and scenarios to provide a hands-on method of developing confidence and leadership skills. Students observe and participate in the rotation through various levels of leadership positions at the platoon and squad level within the Army command structure. This concept provides a constant learning environment as they learn to communicate effectively and work as a team while assigned to positions at various levels within the organization. Marching, rifle firing, and tactical patrolling; students gain confidence through rappelling and construction/use of rope bridges; and increase professional knowledge in areas such as first aid, water survival, personal physical fitness, and land navigation. Teaching locations include the ISU Armory, Camp Dodge (National Guard Facility), Pammel Woods (ISU campus), and ISU fitness centers. Full participation in all events will be determined based on students' physical and medical eligibility."Instructs students on the fundamental skills and proficiencies required of Cadets in the Army Reserve Officer Training Corps and Officers in the United States Army. Allows students to explore the Army culture whose ultimate success is determined by the character and proficiency of its' leaders. Students will gain an insight to the effects of human behavior and communication on the function of the Army's basic unit structures. Special focus is given to the emphasis the Army puts on the development and character of the leader and how that affects the culture and operation of the Army as an institution. Students will develop an understanding of the role that morals and ethics play in becoming an Army Officer and leading American Soldiers. Introduction to basic officer/soldier skills will elucidate the complex role of the Officer in the modern Army."Uses basic military training, missions and scenarios to provide a hands-on method of developing confidence and leadership skills. Rotation through various levels of leadership positions at the platoon and squad level within the Army command structure. Provides a constant learning environment as they learn to communicate effectively and work as a team while assigned to positions at various levels within the organization. Students also learn various military tasks such as marching, rifle firing, and tactical patrolling; gain confidence through rappelling and construction/use of rope bridges; and increase professional knowledge in areas such as first aid, water survival, personal physical fitness, and land navigation. Teaching locations include the ISU Armory, Camp Dodge (National Guard Facility), Pammel Woods (ISU campus), and ISU fitness centers. Full participation in all events will be determined based on students' physical and medical eligibility.""This lab is designed to use basic military skills and instruction to develop confidence, leadership, and physical fitness.  The team approach is utilized in the instruction and application of Army physical fitness requirements.  Students will learn various Army physical fitness techniques as well as how to conduct physical fitness sessions.  Teaching locations include Lied Recreation Center, Beyer Hall, State Gym as well as around campus.  Full participation in all events will be determined based on students physical and medical eligibility.""Explores the development of leadership and communication skills by understanding and studying the principles, traits, and dynamics of leadership and effective communication techniques. These include; leadership dimensions, human behavior, time management skills, stress management, values and ethics, decision making process, problem solving skills, team building exercises, communication techniques, briefing skills, delegating, nutrition, fitness, and counseling. Leadership assessment programs, role playing, active class participation, speeches, country briefs, and video clips are used to enhance and reinforce the instruction.""Uses basic military training, missions and scenarios to provide a hands-on method of developing confidence and leadership skills. Students observe and participate in the rotation through various levels of leadership positions at the platoon and squad level within the Army command structure. Learn to communicate effectively and work as a team while assigned to positions at various levels within the organization. Students also learn various military tasks such as marching, rifle firing, and tactical patrolling; gain confidence through rappelling and construction/use of rope bridges; and increase professional knowledge in areas such as first aid, water survival, personal physical fitness, and land navigation. Teaching locations include the ISU Armory, Camp Dodge (National Guard Facility), Pammel Woods (ISU campus), and ISU fitness centers. Full participation in all events will be determined based on students' physical and medical eligibility.""Class focuses on the characteristics and features of the earth's land mass and how to apply different methods of conducting navigation on land. These methods include; by use of topographical maps, compasses, aerial photographs, military maps, symbols, and all their practical application. These navigation techniques are used in class in conjunction with patrolling techniques and squad movement exercises. Students will utilize verbal and non-verbal communication, communication techniques, and briefing techniques during this class. Students are also assigned to read one professional book from the Army Reading List and complete a written review of the book in the Army writing style.""Uses basic military training, missions and scenarios to provide a hands-on method of developing confidence and leadership skills. Students observe and participate in the rotation through various levels of leadership positions at the platoon and squad level within the Army command structure. Learn to communicate effectively and work as a team while assigned to positions at various levels within the organization. Students also learn various military tasks such as marching, rifle firing, and tactical patrolling; gain confidence through rappelling and construction/use of rope bridges; and increase professional knowledge in areas such as first aid, water survival, personal physical fitness, and land navigation. Teaching locations include the ISU Armory, Camp Dodge (National Guard Facility), Pammel Woods (ISU campus), and ISU fitness centers. Full participation in all events will be determined based on students' physical and medical eligibility.""Students learn to plan and conduct physical fitness sessions, following Army physical fitness readiness requirements.  Development of physical fitness plan and leadership of training sessions.  Participation determined by students' physical and medical eligibility.""Students learn to plan and conduct physical fitness sessions, following Army physical fitness readiness requirements.  Development of physical fitness plan, and leadership of training sessions.  Participation determined by students' physical and medical eligibility."Survey of U.S. Army history focused on the Army's social and cultural interactions from colonial wars up to the First World War.  Examines the roles of race and culture in Army structure and operations."Investigation of an approved topic.  Must result in a professional journal-worthy paper on ethics, current military issues, interpersonal communications, or leadership development.""Develops student's proficiency in analyzing, planning, and executing complex operations within a military organizational structure. Students are given situational opportunities and then measured on their leadership abilities through systematic feedback. Student's evaluations are based on sixteen leadership dimensions within the realms of values, attributes, skills, and actions. Students develop an understanding of human cultural heritage and history, as it pertains to the armed forces.""The lab compliments M S 301 by providing opportunities to practice the lessons from class. On-the-job training and evaluation provided by the ROTC cadre. Developing training programs, structuring laboratories, presenting classes, planning various events, and accepting responsibility for the leadership labs. Participating in the Water Survival test, Army Physical Fitness test and the Land Navigation test are required.""Prepares students to attend the Leadership Develop and Assessment Course at Fort Lewis, Washington in which they will be assigned specific and situational tasks to accomplish by providing purpose, motivation, and direction to fellow students across the nation. Students will learn how to identify sixteen leadership dimensions in the under classmen and provide specific feedback on their leadership behaviors. Students will develop their oral communication skills about the plans developed by the class, through small group presentation settings. Students will develop methods of studying human behavior.""The lab compliments M S 302 by providing opportunities to practice the lessons from class. On-the-job training and evaluation provided by the ROTC cadre. Developing training programs, structuring laboratories, presenting classes, planning various events, and accepting responsibility for the leadership labs. Participating in the Water Survial Test, Army Physical Fitness Test and the Land Navigation test required.""Develops student proficiency in analyzing and evaluating leadership behaviors, such as values, attributes, skills, and actions. Students are given situational opportunities to assess leadership and provide feedback to other students placed in leadership roles. Students will be measured by their ability to both give and receive systematic and specific feedback on leadership behaviors. Students will develop their ability to communicate thoughts and ideas orally through small group presentations and group discussions. Students will supervise and evaluate the planning and execution of complex operations within a military organizational structure.""The lab compliments the instruction from class by demonstrating the indelible link between personal values and successful leadership. On-the-job training and evaluation provided by the ROTC cadre. Developing training programs, structuring laboratories, presenting classes, planning various events, and accepting responsibility for the leadership labs.""Explores the dynamics of leading in the complex situations of current military operations in a contemporary world. Students will examine the differences in customs, courtesies and operational principles in the face of international terrorism. Students will also explore aspects of interaction with nongovernmental organizations, civilians and media in a war zone and foreign national governments. The course uses case studies, scenarios, and practical exercises, which prepare the student to face complex ethical and practical demands of leading soldiers within a multifaceted military organizational structure.""The lab compliments the instruction from class by demonstrating the indelible link between personal values and successful leadership. On-the-job training and evaluation provided by the ROTC cadre. Developing training programs, structuring laboratories, presenting classes, planning various events, and accepting responsibility for the leadership labs.""Investigation of an approved topic. Must result in a professional journal-worthy paper on ethics, current military issues, interpersonal communications, or leadership development.""The principles of molecular genetics: gene structure and function at the molecular level, including regulation of gene expression, genetic rearrangement, and the organization of genetic information in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.""Cell biological processes including cell signaling, cell division, intracellular trafficking, biogenesis of organelles, cell adhesion and motility.""Fundamental principles in multicellular development. Emphasis on cellular and molecular regulation of developmental processes, and experimental approaches as illustrated in the current literature.""Plant nuclear and organelle genomes; regulation of gene expression; hormone signaling; organization, function, and development of plant cells and subcellular structures; regulation of plant growth and development.""Analysis of the biochemical processes involved in expression of eucaryotic genes and the regulation thereof, including RNA polymerase, transcriptional regulatory proteins, enhancers and silencers, chromosome structure, termination, RNA processing, RNA transport, RNA turnover, small RNAs, translational regulation, protein turnover.""Graduate research projects performed under the supervision of selected faculty members in the molecular, cellular, and developmental biology program."Student and faculty presentations."Notation, recognition, execution and analysis of scales, intervals, triads, and rhythm; key signatures; time signatures; transposition.   Open to non-majors only.""Expansion of the music listening experiences for the general student through greater awareness of differences in techniques of listening, performance media, and materials of the art. The course focuses on the elements of music: rhythm, melody, harmony, form, and style, and how these elements are used in musics of different cultures and time periods. Ability to read or perform music not required.""Beginning keyboard techniques, sight-reading, and ear training. Basic materials of music: notation, scales, intervals, key signatures,   time signatures, rhythm, and harmony."Emphasis on significant extended compositions for wind and percussion instruments. Performances include formal concerts on campus and the annual tour.Repertoire includes the broad spectrum of band music. Two concerts are presented each semester.Designed to explore various styles and trends in contemporary jazz.Performances at athletic events."Membership determined by audition and band application. Auditions held for woodwind, brass, percussion, flag, and twirler positions. Presentation of pre-game and half time shows at each home football game; additional performances are also scheduled on and off campus. Audition information is listed on the band website (www.music.iastate.edu/org/marching).   Students may not be concurrently enrolled in MUSIC 114A and 114C."Performances at basketball games.Performances at wrestling and womenÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s soccer games.   Students may not be concurrently enrolled in MUSIC 114A and 114C.Stresses high quality wind literature. Performances include formal concerts on campus.Applied music for the general student.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors.   Will not satisfy applied music requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors.   Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors.   Will not satisfy applied music requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors.   Will not satisfy applied music requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors.   Will not satisfy applied music requirements for music majors.Applied music for music majors.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required."Directed studies via aural analysis for music majors with emphasis on the materials of music, form and aesthetic issues. Introduction to style and literature of the major performance media in context of historical chronology. Fundamentals of score reading and performance terminology.   Only one of Music 120 and 302 can count toward graduation.""Beginning keyboard technique,  transposition, harmonization, ensemble and solo repertory, and sight-reading skills.""Continuation of beginning keyboard technique,  transposition, harmonization, ensemble and solo repertory, and sight-reading   skills."Small mixed chorus specializing in advanced vocal jazz techniques. Performances on and off campus."Large chorus; emphasis on fundamental vocal and choral skills, wide variety of literature. Campus concerts each semester.""Advanced skills required, high quality literature. Campus concerts each semester, some concerts in conjunction with orchestras. Men's and women's choirs separately and in combination.""Advanced skills required, high quality literature. Campus concerts each semester, some concerts in conjunction with orchestras. Men's and women's choirs separately and in combination.""Advanced skills required, high quality literature. Campus concerts each semester, some concerts in conjunction with orchestras. Men's and women's choirs separately and in combination.""Concert choir specializing in performance of advanced music literature, Renaissance through contemporary. Campus concerts, annual spring tour.""Reading, preparation, and performance of standard repertoire. Five or six concerts annually plus occasional off-campus appearances."Applied music for music majors.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required."Brief review of music fundamentals including keys, modes, rhythm and meter.  Two-voice species counterpoint as an introduction to voice-leading principles in diatonic harmony.  Application of these materials in analysis and four-part writing. Introduction to Finale notation software and other technology used in the study of music.""Aural discrimination of intervals, rhythms and patterns, as demonstrated by proficiency in ear training, sight singing, and related musicianship skills.""Intermediate keyboard technique, transposition, harmonization, improvisation, repertory, and sight-reading skills. Introduction to   score reading, hymn playing, and accompanying at the piano.""Continuation of intermediate keyboard technique, transposition, harmonization, improvisation,  repertory, score reading, hymn   playing, and accompanying at the piano.""Harmonic and melodic materials of tonal music with an emphasis on diatonic harmony. Application of these materials in analysis and writing. Techniques of melodic construction, formal design, and harmonization.""Development of sight singing, ear training, and related musicianship skills with emphasis on diatonic harmonic and melodic materials as well as rhythm.""Introduction to audio and MIDI applications using a digital audio workstation.  Includes fundamentals of audio editing and mixing, MIDI theory, practical projects in software-based musical arrangements and composition.""Introduction to computer software applications used in musical arrangements and presentations, practical   introduction to audio   and   MIDI technologies in lab-based music instruction, basic recording/sound reinforcement and music website   management.   Intended   for Music Education Majors.""Experiencing and understanding the fundamentals of music through singing, playing classroom instruments, body movement, reading notation, listening, and creative activities. Developing lesson plan strategies and sequence, exploring multicultural musics, integrating music with other subjects in the elementary classroom, and evaluating aspects of musical learning.""Required for first-year majors in music education. Historical, philosophical, and social foundations of music education; music curricula overview including goals of the music program, and contemporary and international curriculum development; psychology of teaching music including discipline techniques. Preparation for required observations in area schools."Pre-student teaching experience in music in school settings.  Permission of Music coordinator required prior to enrollment. Clinical Experience Level 1.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Independent study.Independent study in music education.Independent stud in music theory.Independent study in music composition.Independent study in music history.Independent study in music literature.Independent study in applied music.Independent study in conducting.Independent honors project in music.Independent study in music business."Study of selected opera scenes, chamber operas, and works from contemporary and classical music  theater. Basic stagecraft, role interpretation, production.""Study of selected opera scenes and chamber operas. Basic stagecraft, role interpretation, production.""Study of selected works from contemporary and classical music  theater. Basic stagecraft, role interpretation, production.""Exploration of several great works of classical music in light of the artistic culture in which they were composed; and trends in musical styles as well as individual composersÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢ personalities over history through listening and discussion. Some concert attendance is required outside of class. An ability to read music is not required, but is recommended. Non-majors only.   Only one of Music 120 and 302 can count toward graduation.""Rock 'n' Roll from the mid 1950s through the 1990s, focusing on the development of rock styles from its roots in blues, folk, country, and pop. Expansion of listening experience through study of song forms, musical instruments of rock, and the socio-political significance of song lyrics. Examinations, research paper or in class presentation required. Ability to read or perform music not required."Applied music for students other than music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.(.5-0) for 1 cr. (1-0) for 2 cr. Applied music for the general student. Open only to non-majors. Will not satisfy applied music   requirements for music majors.Applied music for music majors.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.Performance in chamber music ensembles that demand high proficiency.Performance in ensembles that demand high proficiency. Open to a limited number of undergraduate and graduate students.Performance in ensembles that demand high proficiency. Open to a limited number of undergraduate and graduate students.Performance in ensembles that demand high proficiency. Open to a limited number of undergraduate and graduate students.Performance in ensembles that demand high proficiency. Open to a limited number of undergraduate and graduate students.Performance in ensembles that demand high proficiency. Open to a limited number of undergraduate and graduate students.Performance in ensembles that demand high proficiency. Open to a limited number of undergraduate and graduate students.Performance in ensembles that demand high proficiency. Open to a limited number of undergraduate and graduate students.Performance in ensembles that demand high proficiency. Open to a limited number of undergraduate and graduate students.The international phonetic alphabet and its application to correct pronunciation of English and Italian in singing.The international phonetic alphabet and its application to correct pronunciation of French and German in singing."Emphasis on sight reading, three and four-part score reading, improvisation, accompanying, and advanced harmonization.""Emphasis on sight reading, three and four-part score reading, improvisation, accompanying, and advanced harmonization.""Emphasis on sight reading, three and four-part score reading, improvisation, accompanying, and advanced harmonization.""Harmonic and melodic materials of tonal music with an emphasis on chromatic harmony. Application of these materials in analysis and writing. Techniques of melodic construction, formal design, and harmonization.""Development of sight singing, ear training, and related musical skills with emphasis on melodic, harmonic and rhythmic materials from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries."Writing and analysis based on musical styles since 1900."Development of sight singing, ear training, and related musical skills with emphasis on melodic, harmonic and rhythmic materials from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries."Advanced MIDI and digital audio programming applications for composition and live performance.Techniques and skills required for teaching of instruments. Examination of materials for school use. Intended for instrumental     music education students.Techniques and skills required for teaching of instruments. Examination of materials for school use. Intended for instrumental     music education students.Techniques and skills required for teaching of instruments. Examination of materials for school use.   Intended for instrumental   music education students.Techniques and skills required for teaching of instruments. Examination of materials for school use. Intended for instrumental     music education students.Techniques and skills required for teaching of instruments. Examination of materials for school use. Intended for instrumental     music education students."Techniques and skills required to teach percussion instruments in the schools. Techniques for performing and teaching snare drum,     keyboard percussion instruments, timpani, band and orchestral hand instruments, drum set, and Latin percussion. Intended for     instrumental music education students."Review and selection of appropriate literature for ensembles of differing levels and abilities; conducting and rehearsal experience. Intended for music education students."Sight singing, conducting, and accompanying experience in conjunction with 362A. Required of all vocal music education majors every semester offered.""Performance on secondary instruments. Includes experiences with singing and vocal techniques. Required of all instrumental music education majors in those semesters when enrolled in 350, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, or 362B.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Physical, acoustical, and musical properties of the vocal instrument, including a survey of important texts and articles on singing and   voice production."Introduction to conducting; score reading and analysis. Conveying musical ideas through appropriate gestures. Leadership role of the conductor."Advanced baton technique, score preparation and interpretation of choral repertoire."Advanced baton technique. Score preparation. Specific problems of large instrumental ensembles."Music education strategies and materials including development of appropriate objectives and plans for general music classes utilizing traditional and multicultural musics, evaluating musical learning; overview of Orff Schulwerk, Kodaly, and Dalcroze approaches; music in special education; required teaching in lab settings and observations in area schools.""Overview of choral repertoire from the sixteenth century to the present, including accessible works for the young conductor.""Techniques and materials for teaching marching band in the high school; philosophy, computer assisted drill design, music analysis, band set up, and other related skills. Jazz style, articulation, phrasing, materials and teaching techniques for secondary school jazz ensembles."History of the stylistic and cultural development of music: Middle Ages through Baroque.History of the stylistic and cultural development of music: Classical through contemporary music.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline.Includes experience in technology relative to the particular discipline."Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences."Applied music for music majors.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.(.5-2) for 1 cr. (1-2) for 2-3 cr. Minimum weekly practice of 5 hours per credit is expected. Weekly seminar required.Performance of advanced repertory in a public concert. Preparation of program notes.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Various topics in music theory including analysis, counterpoint, arranging, pedagogy, and psychology of music. Content will vary.   Contact the Department of Music for the current year offering.""Techniques of digital sound synthesis, software synthesizer design, and electronic music composition.""Instructional materials and methods appropriate for teaching instrumental music in elementary, middle school, and high school   music programs. Required observations in area schools. Intended for instrumental music education students."Instructional materials and methods appropriate for teaching choral music in the secondary school. Emphasis on pedagogy and   rehearsal techniques. Required observations in area schools. Intended for vocal music education students."Developing a rationale for music education; music program development; evaluation of music curricula, programs and facilities;   professional growth of the teacher; preparation for student teaching and the job market. Required observations in area schools.""History and development of the sacred and secular music in North America from approximately 1600 to the   present, exploring the   diverse cultural backgrounds that have contributed to the variety of contemporary musical styles.""Offered F. 2011. Detailed survey of instrumental, vocal, choral, and keyboard music from 1600 to 1825.""Offered F. 2012. Detailed survey of instrumental, vocal, choral, and keyboard music from 1825 to 1910.""Offered S 2013. Detailed survey of instrumental, vocal, choral, and keyboard music from 1900 to the present."Observation and participation in a variety of school settings after admission to the teacher preparation program.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Participation in a K-12 school setting. Cross-listed with MUSIC 480K. Permission of Music coordinator required prior to enrollment. Clinical Experience Level 2.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Three months of relevant work experience in natural resources, animal ecology, or forestry. Study at a summer biological station may be applicable. See adviser for specific requirements and approval process.""Orientation to the University and to the Department of Natural Resource Ecology and Management.  Discussion of departmental learning outcomes, strategies for academic success and academic planning.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Enrollment limited to members of the NREM Transitions Learning Community.  Designed to assist new transfer students and continuing sophomore students with their transition to the academic expectations and professional development aspects of the natural resource program.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to developing intentional learners and worthy team members. Learning as the foundation of human enterprise; intellectual curiosity; ethics as a personal responsibility; everyday leadership; effective team and community interactions including team learning and the effects on individuals; and growth through understanding self, demonstrating ownership of own learning, and internalizing commitment to helping others. Intentional mental processing as a means of enhancing learning. Interconnectedness of the individual, the community, and the world."Focus on team and community. Application of fundamentals of human learning; evidence of development as a responsible learner; intentional mental processing as a habit of mind; planning and facilitating learning opportunities for others; responsibility of the individual to the community and the world; leading from within; holding self and others accountable for growth and development as learners and leaders."Overview of soil, water, plants, and animals as renewable natural resources in an ecosystem context. History and organization of resource management. Concepts of integrated resource management.""Survey of the ecology and management of fish, forest, and wildlife resources in areas of intensive agriculture, with emphasis on Iowa. Conservation and management practices for private agricultural lands. Designed for nonmajors.""A survey of the artistry of wood as appreciated in spatial scale from microscopic anatomy to engineered wood structures. Anatomical and physical properties that render wood as a medium for artistic expression. The works of local artists, designers and engineers will be featured. The University Museums collection and Art on Campus will be explored.""Introduction to North American model of conservation, current funding for natural resource management, role of hunting and angling in the North American model, critique and refinement of the model for the 21st century, and introduction to natural resource leadership, and outdoor skills and recreation.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Career planning exploration in natural resources.  Discussion of the job application process, including techniques for successful interviewing and development of an effective resume.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""The development of natural resource conservation philosophy and policy from the Colonial Era to the present. North American wildlife, forestry, and environmental policy; national parks and other protected lands; federal and state agencies.  Relationship to cultural contexts, including urban reform and American planning movement. Discussion of common pool resources, public and private lands.""Effects of environmental factors on ecosystem structure and function using forest, prairie and agricultural ecosystems as models. Special emphasis is given to soil-forming factors and the role of soil in nutrient and water cycling and ecosystem dynamics.  Additional emphasis is given to human influences on natural ecosystems and the role of perennial plant communities in agricultural landscapes.""Placement with county conservation boards, camps, zoos, parks, etc., for experience as interpreters, rangers, and technicians.""Placement with county conservation boards, camps, parks, etc. for experience as interpreters, rangers, and technicians."Current topics in natural resources or related issues."Introduction into how genetic techniques and technologies can aid the management of the earth's biotic resources. Topics include an overview of DNA structure, function and inheritance; tools and techniques for measuring genetic diversity; genetic management of wild and captive populations: DNA forensics as management tool. The goal of this course is to prepare managers/biologists to interpret genetic data as they relate to natural resource conservation.""History, objectives, forms, and techniques of interpretation in the settings of county, state, national parks, and zoos. Principles of effective communication as they apply to natural resource fields including wildlife management, forestry, and wildlife rehabilitation. Planning and use of effective communications and outreach campaigns to manage and conserve natural resources."Introduction to techniques used in the collection and interpretation of fish population data in the field and in the lab.  Course objectives include an understanding of population survey methodology and improving student critical thinking and teamwork skills. Laboratory focuses on field trips and hands-on sampling experience."Measurement and interpretation of aerial photos in resource management. Introduction to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) using ArcGIS including digitizing, development and query of attribute tables, georeferencing, and use of multiple GIS layers in simple spatial analyses.""Offered 1st half semester only.  Survey of the major plant families, genera, and representative species of Midwestern prairies with emphasis on plant identification. Prairie management for multiple species of plants and wildlife.""Survey of the major plant families, general, and representative species of the forest herbaceous layer. Functional ecology and restoration.""Development, theory and practice of natural resource policy. Integrative approach with topical policy studies in North American wildlife, forestry, and water.  Policy formation, the role of science, introduction to federal law compliance.  Readings, lectures, projects.""Characteristics and role of fire in forest ecosystems. Major topics covered include fuels, fire weather, fire behavior, fire danger rating systems, fire control, prescribed burning, and fire dynamics in major ecosystem types.""Examination of watersheds as systems, emphasizing the surface components of the hydrologic cycle.  Combines qualitative understanding of hydrological processes and uncertainty with quantitative representation.  Laboratory emphasizes field investigation and measurement of watershed processes.""Managing human impacts on the hydrologic cycle. Field and watershed level best management practices for modifying the impacts on water quality, quantity and timing are discussed. Field project includes developing a management plan using landscape buffers."Emphasis on the use of GPS as a data collection tool for GIS. Basic theory of GPS. Use of Global Positioning System technology for spatial data collection and navigation. Post-processing and real-time correction of GPS data. GPS data transfer to GIS for mapping applications. Use of GIS to construct waypoints for use in GPS navigation."Principles of planning, regulating, and decision-making associated with public and private lands, with consideration of forest, grassland, wetland, and freshwater aquatic ecosystems.  Integrated natural resources management within ecological, social, economic and policy constraints.""Analysis of controversial natural resource issues using a case approach that considers uncertainty and adequacy of information and scientific understanding. Ecological, social, political, economic, and ethical implications of issues will be analyzed.""Exploration of issues in landscape ecology and conservation biology relevant to landscape change, design, and planning. Examination of foundational principles and their applications across a continuum of land uses, from wilderness to urban areas.""Land use and conservation techniques for improving ecosystem services including: pollination of crops, biological control of pests, prevention of erosion and water quality improvement.""Concepts of sustainable land use, agroecological dynamics, and component interactions of agroforestry systems. Agroforestry systems in temperate and tropical regions. Design and evaluation techniques for agroforestry systems. Ecological, socioeconomic and political aspects of agroforestry.""Electromagnetic-radiation principles, active and passive sensors, multispectral and hyperspectral sensors, imaging radar, SAR, thermal imaging, lidar. Examples of applications. Also offered online S."Processing and analysis of satellite sensor data (optical and radar). Provides practical applications in an environmental context."Research opportunities for undergraduate students in the biological sciences.   No more than 9 credits in Biol 490 may be counted toward graduation and of those, only 6 credits may be applied to the major."Limited enrollment. Extended field trips to study ecological topics in varied environments. Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Trip expenses paid by students.Limited enrollment. Extended field trips to study ecological and management topics in varied environments. Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Trip expenses paid by students.Limited enrollment. Extended field trips to study ecological and management topics in varied environments. Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Trip expenses paid by students.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register prior to commencing each work period."Examination of watersheds as systems, emphasizing the surface components of the hydrologic cycle.  Combines qualitative understanding of hydrological processes and uncertainty with quantitative representation.  Laboratory emphasizes field investigation and measurement of watershed processes.""Detailed analysis of factors and processes underlying forest and stand growth and development. Applications of this knowledge to forest culture to support a diversity of use and protection objectives. Discussions of regional silviculture, tropical forests, and experimentation in forest biology."Current topics in natural resources research and management."Managing human impacts on the hydrologic cycle. Field and watershed level best management practices for modifying the impacts on water quality, quantity and timing are discussed. Field project includes developing a management plan using landscape buffers."Analysis of aquatic ecosystems; emphasis on basic ecological principles; ecological theories tested in the field; identification of common plants and animals."Soil erosion processes, soil loss equations and their application to conservation planning, sediment properties, initiation of sediment motion and over land flow, flow in alluvial channels and theory of sediment transport, channel stability, reservoir sedimentation, wind erosion, BMPs for controlling erosion.""Theory and practice of restoring animal and plant diversity, structure and function of disturbed ecosystems. Restored freshwater wetlands, forests, prairies and reintroduced species populations will be used as case studies."Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Techniques. Includes: fermentation, protein isolation, protein purification, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, NMR, confocal microscopy and laser microdissection, Immunophenotyping, and monoclonal antibody production. Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Emphasis on the use of GPS as a data collection tool for GIS. Basic theory of GPS. Use of Global Positioning System technology for spatial data collection and navigation. Post-processing and real-time correction of GPS data. GPS data transfer to GIS for mapping applications. Use of GIS to construct waypoints for use in GPS navigation."Principles of planning, regulating, and decision-making associated with public and private lands, with consideration of forest, grassland, wetland, and freshwater aquatic ecosystems.  Integrated natural resources management within ecological, social, economic and policy constraints.""Exploration of issues in landscape ecology and conservation biology relevant to landscape change, design, and planning. Examination of foundational principles and their applications across a continuum of land uses, from wilderness to urban areas.""Land use and conservation techniques for improving ecosystem services including: pollination of crops, biological control of pests, prevention of erosion and water quality improvement."Analytical approach to economic aspects of forest resource management problems. Theory and application of economic decision-making criteria to traditional and modern forest resource management issues. Current problems in the allocation of forest resources."Concepts of sustainable land use, agroecological dynamics, and component interactions of agroforestry systems. Agroforestry systems in temperate and tropical regions. Design and evaluation techniques for agroforestry systems. Ecological, socioeconomic and political aspects of agroforestry.""Research design, proposal preparation, and technical writing.""Development, theory and practice of natural resource policy. Integrative approach with topical policy studies in North American wildlife, forestry, and water.  Policy formation, the role of science, introduction to federal law compliance.""Electromagnetic-radiation principles, active and passive sensors, multispectral and hyperspectral sensors, imaging radar, SAR, thermal imaging, lidar. Examples of applications. Also offered online S."Limited enrollment. Extended field trips to study ecological and management topics in varied environments. Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Trip expenses paid by students.Limited enrollment. Extended field trips to study ecological topics in varied environments. Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Trip expenses paid by students.Limited enrollment. Extended field trips to study ecological topics in varied environments. Location and duration of trips will vary. Pre-trip sessions arranged. Trip expenses paid by students.Graduate student experience in teaching.  Student must plan and present at least one unit of subject matter in a course or extension workshop.  Teaching practicum must be documented by the student and approved by the studentÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s POS committee.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Current topics in natural resources research and management."Graduate student experience in teaching.  Student must plan and present substantive subject matter for a minimum of three weeks in lecture and/or laboratory formats, or a series of extension seminars/workshops.  Teaching practicum must be documented by the student and approved by the studentÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s POS committee.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to the organization, regulations, and capabilities of the US Navy, with emphasis on mission and principal warfare components.""An historical survey of sea power in terms of national domestic environments, foreign policy, and the evolution of maritime forces with trends in technology, doctrine, and tactics.  The student will develop an understanding of the role the US Navy has played in the nation's history, both in peace and war.  Naval events, forces and policies will be studied as elements in the shaping of the national consciousness and sense of purpose.  Course content will include the development of the concept of sea power, the role of various warfare components of the Navy, the implementation of sea power as an instrument of national policy, the evolution of naval tactics, and the influence of maritime affairs around the world.""Introduction to the basic concepts of management and organization, their application to operations and personnel management. Experiential approach to learning principles of leadership and management by examining various management theories and their applications. Skills are developed in the areas of communication, counseling, control, direction, management, and leadership through active guided participation."Study of the fundamentals of marine navigation used by ships at sea; includes practical exercises in piloting using visual and electronic means.  In-depth discussion of laws that govern conduct of vessels in national and international waters.  Course is supplemented with review and analysis of case studies involving actual navigation incidents."An introduction to naval engineering with emphasis on the equipment and machinery involved in the conversion of energy for propulsion and other purposes aboard the major ship types of the U.S. fleet. Basic concepts of the theory and design of steam, gas turbine, diesel, and nuclear propulsion. Introduction to ship design, stability, hydrodynamic forces, compartmentalization, electrical and auxiliary systems.""Evolution of warfare from 3500 B.C. to contemporary times; analysis of the impact of historical precedents on modern military thought and action; emphasis on the historical development of military tactics, strategy, and technology.""Introduction to the theory and principles of operation of naval weapon systems. Included coverage of types of weapons and fire control systems, capabilities and limitations; theory of target acquisition, identification and tracking; basics of naval ordnance.""Study of tactical naval operations; employs practical use of maneuvering boards together with shiphandling principles to arrive at tactical shipboard maneuvering solutions. Study also of naval command and control, communications, and the Naval Warfare Doctrine.""Basic background concerning the duties and responsibilities of the junior naval officer and division officer in the areas of integrity and ethics, human resources management, personnel management, material management, and the administration of discipline. Preparation for responsibilities encountered immediately upon commissioning.""Defines the concept of amphibious operations, origins, and development from 600 B.C., focusing on the history and development of amphibious warfare, the principles and techniques of amphibious warfare and the application of principles and techniques to selected examples from recent history.""Current leadership issues in the US Navy which will challenge the newly commissioned officer. Opportunities to analyze, provide solutions, and discuss actions related to a variety of real world situations."No more than 9 credits of N S 490 may be counted toward graduation."Fundamental principles of neuroscience including cellular and molecular neuroscience, nervous system development, sensory, motor and regulatory systems.""Research methods and techniques; lectures, laboratory exercises and/or demonstrations representing individual faculty specialties.""Topics may include molecular and cellular neuroscience, neurodevelopment, neuroplasticity, neurodegenerative diseases, cognitive neuroscience, sensory biology, neural integration, membrane biophysics, neuroethology, techniques in neurobiology and behavior."Students are required to attend and make at least one presentation at a weekly journal club focusing on current topics."Presentations and discussion of research by students, faculty, and visiting scholars."Atomic and nuclear physics. Radioactivity and reaction rates. Cross sections. Introduction to neutron diffusion theory. Engineering applications of radiation theory.WWW only. Fission and chain reactions. Neutron diffusion and moderation. Reactor equations. Fermi Age theory. Multigroup and multiregional analysis. Contact Nuclear Engineering program director for enrollment information."WWW only. Basic principles and concepts of radiation protection and design: dosimetric units and response functions, hazards of radiation dose, radiation sources, basic methods for dose evaluation, and shielding design techniques for photons and neurons.""WWW only. An introduction to neutron diffusion theory, neutron moderation, conditions for criticality of nuclear reactors.""Nomenclature, theory, and practice of nuclear criticality safety. Review of nuclear criticality accidents, analytical methods used in criticality analysis, review of standards and regulations, and developing criticality safety evaluations.""The relationship between nuclear energy and society is examined from the perspective of significant events in the commercial nuclear power industry. Event analysis includes differences and similarities of technologies along with environmental impact. Political, social, media and regulatory responses for each event are discussed along with the impact on future plant design.""Methods for analysis of nuclear power systems. Fault tree and event tree analysis methods. Mathematical basics for dealing with reliability data, theory, and analysis. Case studies of accidents in nuclear power systems."Principles of nuclear radiation safety and detection. Radiation energy spectroscopy. Counting statistics and error analysis. Monte Carlo simulation of radiation transport. Detection system performance parameters. Design projects.Investigation of nuclear engineering topics.  Election of course and topic must be approved in advance by supervising faculty."Integration of the molecular, cellular, and physiologic aspects of energy, macronutrient, and micronutrient metabolism in mammalian systems. Survey course that includes interactions among nutrients (dietary carbohydrate, fiber, lipid, protein, vitamins, and minerals) and non-nutrients, metabolic consequences of nutrient deficiencies or excesses, relevant polymorphisms, and major research methodologies.""Principles regarding the development of adipose tissue and its role in energy balance, and will focus considerably on endocrine and immune actions of the adipocyte.  Course material will be in lecture format, including handouts and selected journal articles.  Students will be asked to lead critical discussions of key research findings as summary material for a given topic.  Species differences will be highlighted, particularly as they relate to research models.""Discussion of epigenetic regulation of gene expression and the role that nutrition plays in this process.  Examination of current research literature to understand how different nutrients and physiological states influence epigenetics, as well as, the research methodology used to address these relations.""Principles of cancer biology and cancer etiology will be integrated with the impacts of diet on cancer development and prevention.  Contributions of research with humans, animals, cultured cells and cell free systems will be included.  The importance of dietary contaminants, macronutrients and micronutrients will be examined with an emphasis on the strength of the evidence and mechanisms of action."Digestion and metabolism of nutrients. Nutritional requirements and current research and feeding programs for poultry and swine."Basic principles of toxicology. Toxicants in the food supply: modes of action, toxicant defense systems, toxicant and nutrient interactions, risk assessment. Assessed service learning component.   Only one of FS HN 419 and FS HN 519 may count toward graduation."Digestive physiology and nutrient metabolism in ruminant and preruminant animals.Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Techniques. Includes: fermentation, protein isolation, protein purification, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, NMR, confocal microscopy and laser microdissection, Immunophenotyping, and monoclonal antibody production. Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Overview of mammalian physiology. Cell biology, endocrinology, cardiovascular, respiratory, immune, digestive, skeletal muscle and reproductive systems.""Cardiovascular, renal, respiratory, and digestive physiology."(Dual listed with FS HN 461.) Pathophysiology of selected chronic disease states and their associated medical problems. Specific attention will be directed to medical nutrition needs of patients in the treatment of each disease state."Overview and practical applications of methods for assessing nutritional status, including: theoretical framework of nutritional health and disease, dietary intake, biochemical indices, clinical examination, and body composition."Dual listed with FS HN 463. Survey of current public health nutrition problems among nutritionally vulnerable individuals and groups. Discussion of the multidimensional nature of those problems and of community programs addressing them. Grant writing as a means for funding community nutrition program development. Significant emphasis on written and oral communication at the lay and professional level. Field trip.(Dual listed with FS HN 464.) Pathophysiology of selected acute and chronic disease states and their associated medical problems. Specific attention will be directed to medical nutrition needs of patients in the treatment of each disease state."Understanding of basic cancer biology and methodology used to study nutrition and cancer relationships. Using current research as a basis, the role of nutrition in specific cancers will be explored. Students will learn about sources of information for cancer prevention programs, and how to apply this information to clinical patient management.""Understanding molecular aspects of vitamin and mineral metabolism and homeostasis in humans and animals.  An in-depth examination of the chemistry of vitamins and minerals, including genetic mutations, proteins involved in absorption and excretion, and their necessity in biological processes.""Digestion, absorption, and intermediary metabolism of amino acids and protein. Regulation of protein synthesis and degradation. Integration of cellular biochemistry and physiology of mammalian protein metabolism."Energy constituents of feedstuffs and energy needs of animals as related to cellular biochemistry and physiology. Interpretations of classical and current research.Current concepts in nutrition and related fields. Required for all graduate students in nutrition.Grant proposal preparation experiences including writing and critiquing of proposals and budget planning. Formation of grant writing teams in food science and/or nutrition.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Examines how adults acquire and use knowledge, skills, and attitudes within organizational settings; individual differences in learning as well as the principles and elements of the learning organization.""Examines the characteristics and elements of the performance improvement and change process, with special attention to the roles and responsibilities of employees, managers, and organizations when improving individual and organizational learning.""Critical examination of learning acquisition, transfer, and evaluation barriers, partnerships, strategies, and activities; and the roles and responsibilities of human resource development professionals, managers, employees, and organizations in the application and evaluation of learning on the job.""This course is designed for students in the early stages of graduate study in biology or a related field, with the goal of training graduate students in research methods by providing intensive field experience in diverse tropical ecosystems.""This course is designated for students enrolled in graduate course offerings through OTS (excluding OTS 510). Examples of graduate courses offered by OTS include Tropical Plant Systematics, Tropical Ecology and Conservation, Molecular Methods in Tropical Ecology, and Tropical Agroecology."Cross-disciplinary analysis and discussion of topics in the performing arts. Six semesters required of performing arts majors.Required of performing arts majors. A job or internship with a professional or semi-professional performing arts organization.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Intensive collaborative study and practice of topics in music, dance and theatre. Required of performing arts majors."It has been rumored that the unexamined life is not worth living. Philosophy is an attempt to begin examining life by considering such questions as: What makes us human? What is the world ultimately like? How should we relate to other people? Is there a god? How can we know anything about these questions? Understanding questions of this kind and proposed answers to them is what this course is all about.Basic principles of critical reasoning and argument evaluation. A consideration of basic forms of argumentation in science and everyday life. Application to contemporary issues and controversies.Introduction to fundamental logical concepts and logical symbolism. Development of natural deduction through first order predicate logic with identity. Applications to arguments in ordinary English and to philosophical issues. Linguistics majors should take LING/PHIL 207 as early as possible."Investigation of moral issues in the context of major ethical theories of value and obligation; e.g., punishment, abortion, economic justice, job discrimination, world hunger, and sexual morality. Emphasis on critical reasoning and argument analysis.""This course will examine a range of arguments on diversity issues. Topics will include: the social status of women, the moral status of sexuality and homosexuality, the nature and role of racism in contemporary society, the relationship between biology, gender roles and social status, and various proposals for change from a variety of political perspectives.""Survey of ancient Greek philosophy, focusing on the pre-Socratics, Plato, and Aristotle. Questions concerning being, knowledge, language, and the good life are treated in depth.""Readings from philosophers such as Hobbes, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, and Locke. Changing conceptions of knowledge, self, and deities in response to Galileo's new science and post-reformation challenge to ecclesiastical authority.""Readings from philosophers such as Berkeley, Hume, and Kant. Development of Enlightenment thought. Issues include idealism, causation, freedom, and knowledge regarding science, ethics, and deities.""The thought of Hegel, Marx, Nietzsche, and their contemporaries. Various perspectives on the philosophy of history, the nature of reason and subjectivity, the contrast between dialectical and nondialectical philosophy, and the relationship between philosophy and society.""Major movements of 20th and 21st century thought, such as Phenomenology, Critical Theory, Post-structuralism, Postmodernism, and Feminism. Issues include the assumptions and limits of Western metaphysics, the nature of reason, the relationship between language and power.""Major movements in recent and contemporary philosophy such as realism, logical positivism, ordinary language philosophy, and naturalism. Russell, Wittgenstein, Quine and other leading figures. Topics include knowledge of the material world, mind, language, values, and philosophical method.""An investigation of Existentialism and its critics in historical and cultural context. Emphasis on existential phenomenology and French existentialism, and on criticisms. Existential Marxism and Heidegger's later philosophy.""Study of major theories of morality and the good life.  Includes such topics as moral psychology, practical reasoning, and virtue theory.""In-depth study of some of the central moral problems arising in medicine, e.g., abortion, euthanasia, patients' rights, health care professionals' duties and responsibilities, allocation of medical resources. Major moral theories will be examined and applied.""Extent of our obligation to obey the law; what constitutes just punishment; how much of the immoral should be made illegal? Relation of these questions to major theories of law and the state. Discussion of such concepts as coercion, equality, and responsibility.""Thorough study of some of the central moral issues arising in connection with human impact on the environment, e.g., human overpopulation, species extinction, forest and wilderness management, pollution. Several world views of the proper relationship between human beings and nature will be explored.""Foundations of social and political life. The basis of political organization, the nature of social and political institutions, rights and authority, justice. Original texts.""In-depth study of some central moral issues in the life sciences, e.g., genetic screening and testing, genetically engineered plants and animals, risk analysis, biotechnology patents, research ethics, biodiversity, the impact of biotechnology on society and the environment. Major moral theories will be discussed and applied. (PHIL 336 contains almost no similarities to PHIL 331.).""A critical, theoretical examination of the oppression of women, especially as it relates to issues of race, class, and sexual orientation. How concepts such as sex and gender, self and other, nature and nurture, complicate our understanding of what it means to be a woman. Historical and contemporary feminist philosophers addressing topics such as violence, sexuality, pornography, political power, family structure and women's paid and unpaid labor.""An exploration of competing conceptions of liberty in American political thought and debates about how liberty should be protected by the law. Contemporary debates about topics such as health care, drugs, property, speech, religion, and sex.""Is liking all there is to appreciating works of art or natural beauty? We will examine our appreciative experiences, talk about such experiences (e.g., art criticism), and what makes them valuable. Do the different arts have common values? How are their differences important?.""Moral and other philosophical problems related to developments in technology.  Topics may include conditions under which technological innovations contribute to human emancipation, relationship of technology and democracy, utility and limits of technical rationality, and problems of ensuring that benefits of technological advance are communally shared. Topics discussed with reference to such issues as contemporary developments in microelectronics, technology transfer to the Third World, etc."The value and truth of religious life and belief. Mystical experience; religious faith and language; arguments for God's existence; the problem of evil; miracles; and religion and morality. Historical and contemporary readings."A survey of classical and contemporary views on some basic metaphysical issues. Issues discussed include: Does God exist? Do you have a mind and, if so, how does it relate to your body? What is the nature of cause and effect? Do objects have any essential properties? How can we account for properties objects have in common?.""This course focuses on significant topics in theory of knowledge, including the value of true beliefs, the role of sense experience in supporting our theoretical views, and the place of reason in human nature. Historical and contemporary views will be considered.""Introduction to the philosophy of science. A variety of basic problems common to the natural and social sciences: the nature of explanation, the structure of theories, the unity of science, and the distinction between science and nonscience.""Methodological, ideological, and doctrinal issues about the social and behavioral sciences against the background of influence of the natural sciences. Focus is on the historical and cultural background of 19th and 20th century western thought."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Theoretical and normative issues in ethics, aesthetics, religious thought, or political philosophy. Topics vary each time offered.""Personal identity, agency, free will, moral responsibility, causation, future contingents,   and time will be discussed. What makes a person the same person over time?  Do humans   have free will?  Are we not morally responsible if our actions are inevitable consequences   of the past and the laws of nature?  What distinguishes causes from non-causes?  Are   there facts about the future?.""Examination of concepts such as computability, intelligence, programming, and free will; and of arguments about whether any human capacity is forever beyond realization in a machine.""Topics in epistemology. Possible topics include skepticism about the external world, the extent of a priori knowledge, rival accounts of moral knowledge, feminist perspectives on the theory of knowledge, and the value of true belief. Topics vary each time offered.""Philosophical treatment of a branch of science that has (or has had) significant social, political, religious and/or moral implications. Possible topics include: the IQ debate, implications of Darwinism, the Galileo affair, the role of values in science, critical analysis of current science policy (e.g., the Human Genome Project). Topics will be arranged to meet the needs of interested students. Often team taught by a philosopher and a scientist from the relevant discipline.""Biology is powerful, both as a science and in its effects on our culture. Philosophy of biology evaluates this power. Possible topics include: What makes sciences such as evolutionary theory, ecology or molecular biology so good at explaining things? What is life? Can evolution account for design? What role does chance play in evolution? Has there been progress in the evolution of life on earth? What can sociobiology tell us about human nature, behavior and culture?."S. Conceptual and philosophical issues relating to the interpretation of theories in classical and modern physics. May include one or more of the following topics: the relationship between mathematics and the physical world; Newtonian physics (determinism and predictability); thermodynamics and statistical physics (the nature of probability; entropy and the direction of time); relativistic physics (indeterminism; realism and nonlocality; consciousness and the role of the observer).Guided reading and research on special topics selected to meet needs of advanced students.   No more than 9 credits of Phil 490 may be counted toward graduation.Guided reading and research on special topics selected to meet needs of advanced students.   No more than 9 credits of Phil 490 may be counted toward graduation.Final presentation for graduation and the future. Outcomes assessment activities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Examination of theories of justice proposed by contemporary political philosophers. Analysis of the philosophical foundations of perspectives such as liberalism, libertarianism, communitarianism, socialism, feminism. Normative assessments of socio-political institutions.""Topics include moral theory, pedagogical issues in teaching bioethics, and substantive current issues in bioethics."Survey of the principal areas of both classical and modern physics. Emphasis on the nature of the physical universe and the application of physical principles to life in the modern world.   Not suitable to meet a general physics requirement for natural science majors."Physical science principles for future elementary teachers.  Emphasis on experiments that address current elementary science education standards and that are appropriate for their future students to do, such as measurements of mass, length, time, light from atoms, charge and current, motion due to forces, energy and work, heat, waves, optics, building bridges and making musical instruments, studying states of matter and chemical reactions.""General background in physical concepts, principles, and methods for those who do not plan advanced study in physics or engineering. Mechanics, fluids, heat and thermodynamics, vibrations, waves, sound.""General background in physical concepts, principles, and methods for those who do not plan advanced study in physics or engineering. Electricity and magnetism, ray and wave optics, topics in modern physics.""Emphasis on basic physics principles applied to biological problems. Topics include mechanics, fluids, thermodynamics, heat, light, sound, electricity and magnetism. A coordinated laboratory, Physics 115 laboratory is available.""Experiments related to the elementary topics of physics for the life sciences. Mechanics, fluids, thermodynamics, heat, light, sound, electricity and magnetism.""Introductory level course on sound for nonphysics majors. Properties of pure tones and harmonics; human perception of sound; room acoustics; scales; production, and analysis of musical by voice, string, woodwind, brass, and percussion instruments.   Not suitable to meet a general physics requirement for natural science majors""(1-1) Gain experience in key skills that physicists/astronomers use routinely, but are rarely explicitly taught in formal courses. Participate in faculty-led discussions on frontier areas and careers.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""For engineering and science majors. 3 hours of lecture each week plus 3 recitations and 1 laboratory every 2 weeks. Elementary mechanics including kinematics and dynamics of particles, work and energy, linear and angular momentum, conservation laws, rotational motion, oscillations, gravitation. Heat, thermodynamics, kinetic theory of gases; waves and sound.""For engineering and science majors. 3 hours of lecture each week plus 3 recitations and 1 laboratory every 2 weeks. Elementary mechanics including kinematics and dynamics of particles, work and energy, linear and angular momentum, conservation laws, rotational motion, oscillations, gravitation. Heat, thermodynamics, kinetic theory of gases; waves and sound.""3 hours of lecture each week plus 1 recitation and 1 laboratory each week. Electric forces and fields.  Electrical currents; DC circuits.  Magnetic forces and fields: LR, LC, LCR circuits; Maxwell's equations; ray optics and image formation; wave optics; topics in modern physics.""3 hours of lecture each week plus 1 recitation and 1 laboratory each week. Electric forces and fields.  Electrical currents; DC circuits.  Magnetic forces and fields: LR, LC, LCR circuits; Maxwell's equations; ray optics and image formation; wave optics; topics in modern physics.""Covers all of mechanics; Kinematics and dynamics of particles, work and energy, linear and angular momentum, conservation laws, rotational motion, oscillations, gravitation, and extremum principles.  Topics in kinetic theory, thermodynamics, waves and sound.""Covers all of mechanics; Kinematics and dynamics of particles, work and energy, linear and angular momentum, conservation laws, rotational motion, oscillations, gravitation, and extremum principles.  Topics in kinetic theory, thermodynamics, waves and sound.""Electrostatics, potentials and fields, currents, fields of moving charges, the magnetic field, electromagnetic induction, DC and AC circuits, Maxwell's equations and electromagnetic waves, electric and magnetic fields in matter.  Topics in optics, special relativity and modern physics.""Electrostatics, potentials and fields, currents, fields of moving charges, the magnetic field, electromagnetic induction, DC and AC circuits, Maxwell's equations and electromagnetic waves, electric and magnetic fields in matter.  Topics in optics, special relativity and modern physics."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."A largely nonmathematical but intellectually challenging exploration of physics, which assumes no previous work in the field. Selected material from classical and modern physics establishes the conceptual framework for the study of major areas of contemporary physics, culminating in the discussion of topics at the frontier of present knowledge. Topics vary yearly and may include quarks, lasers, superconductivity, fission and fusion, solid state devices, gravitational waves, string theory, facilities, left handed materials, and quantum computing.   Not suitable to meet a general physics requirement for natural science majors.""Concepts of temperature, entropy, and other characteristic thermodynamic functions, with application to macroscopic properties of matter. The laws of thermodynamics. Introduction to statistical mechanics, including quantum statistics. Application to black body radiation, crystalline vibrations, magnetic ions in solids, electronic heat capacity of metals. Phase transformations and chemical reactions.""Oscillating systems including damped and forced oscillations; fluids, geometric optics, water waves, the wave equation, Fourier and Laplace transforms, non-uniform media, cylindrical and spherical waves, polarization, interference and diffraction, transmission lines, non-linear waves.""Common electrical instruments; power supplies; transducers; passive and active devices, analog integrated circuits, including filters and amplifiers; digital integrated circuits; signal transmission and enhancement."Experiments in classical and modern physics performed independently by each student.Experiments in classical and modern physics performed independently by each student. For students preparing for a career in high school teaching."Quantum nature of matter: photons, de Broglie's postulate: wave-like properties of matter; Bohr's model of hydrogen atom; Schrodinger equations in one dimension: energy quantization; detailed solutions for potential steps, barriers and wells; one-electron atoms, spin and magnetic interactions; ground states, optical and x-ray excitations of multi-electron atoms.""Experiments related to the foundations of modern physics. The dual wave and particle character of electrons and photons, statistics, interferometry and x-ray spectroscopy.""Quantum statistics; lasers; physics of molecules. Properties of solids, including electron band structure, superconductivity and magnetism. Nuclear physics, including nuclear sizes and masses, stability, decay modes, reactions, fission and fusion. Elementary particles, including strangeness, charm, and quarks. Fundamental forces of nature.""Experiments related to the foundations of modern physics. Radioactive decay, elementary particles, Hall effect, quantization, spectroscopy, statistics and instrumentation.""Newtonian mechanics including forced oscillations, central forces and orbital motion, collisions, moving frames of reference, Lagrange's equations.""Rigid body motion; small oscillations, normal modes. Special relativity including length contraction, time dilation, simultaneity, Lorentz transformation, 4-vector covariant formalism, relativistic mechanics.""Static electric and magnetic fields, potential theory; electromagnetism, Maxwell's equations."Relativistic electromagnetic theory; radiation and propagation of electromagnetic waves; interaction with matter."Recommended for all junior physics majors. Career opportunities: graduate school programs and application, job placement, alternative careers, basic skills needed for the job market competition.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period.Review of materials and curricula for secondary school physics presented and discussed by members of the class. Required for approval to teach physics in secondary schools."Introduction to ultrafast lasers, nonlinear optics, and their applications.  Topics selected from: basic optics, atom-photon interactions, electrodynamics of condensed matter, laser physics, ultrafast and nonlinear optics, ultrashort pulse generation, broadband pulse generation, time-resolved spectroscopy and instrumentation.""Quantitative description of biological systems using basic physical laws, including a brief discussion of a variety of biophysical techniques.  Topics include:  thermodynamics, chemical equilibrium, gene expression, structure and physical properties of nucleic acids and proteins, folding of nucleic acids and proteins, chemical kinetics, catalysis, allosteric enzymes, cell membrane structure and physical properties, and machines in cell membranes."Theoretical research under supervision of physics faculty.Laboratory project under supervision of physics faculty."Cell and Molecular Biophysics.  Physical techniques used to characterize the structure, dynamics and properties of biomolecules with emphasis on single molecule techniques.""Studies in modern experimental techniques via experimentation and simulation in various areas of applied physics, e.g. superconductivity, optical spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance, electron spin resonance, x-ray diffraction, and computation of electronic and structural properties of matter."First semester of a full-year course. A systematic development of the formalism and applications of quantum mechanics. Solutions to the time independent Schrodinger equation for various one-dimensional potentials including the harmonic oscillator; operator methods; Heisenberg picture; angular momentum; the hydrogen atom; spin; symmetry properties.Continuation of 480. Addition of angular momentum; charged particles in electromagnetic fields; time-independent perturbation theory; variational principles; WKB approximation; interaction picture; time-dependent perturbation theory; adiabatic approximation; scattering; selected topics in radiation theory; quantum paradoxes.No more than 9 credits of Phys 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits of Phys 490 may be counted toward graduation."Review of wave and electromagnetic theory; topics selected from: reflection/refraction, interference, geometrical optics, Fourier analysis, dispersion, coherence, Fraunhofer and Fresnel diffraction, holography, quantum optics, nonlinear optics."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period.A practical introduction to communication methods in physics and astronomy classrooms and professional settings. For graduate physics majors only.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."(1-1) Discussion by research staff of their research areas, expected thesis research work, and opportunities in the field. For graduate physics majors only.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."First semester of a full-year course. Free electron model; crystal symmetry; band theory of solids; transport properties; Fermi surface; phonons; semiconductors; crystal surfaces; magnetism; superconductivity.Continuation of 511. Free electron model; crystal symmetry; band theory of solids; transport properties; Fermi surface; phonons; semiconductors; crystal surfaces; magnetism; superconductivity."Introduction to ultrafast lasers, nonlinear optics, and their applications.  Topics selected from: basic optics, atom-photon interactions, electrodynamics of condensed matter, laser physics, ultrafast and nonlinear optics, ultrashort pulse generation, broadband pulse generation, time-resolved spectroscopy and instrumentation.""Basic properties and structures of nuclei, hadrons, and elementary particles; weak and strong interactions; the Standard Model; accelerators and detectors; nuclear models; nuclear decay and stability; nuclear astrophysics; the Higgs mechanism; the CKM matrix; running coupling constants; relativistic heavy-ion collisions; selected topics beyond the standard model such as SUSY and grand unification.""Fast-paced coverage of mathematical techniques needed for advanced analysis in the physical sciences, particularly for quantum mechanics and electrodynamics. Linear vector spaces and operators.  Linear differential equations for time-evolution and steady-state problems, Green's functions and propagators, Sturm-Liouville problems. Functions of a complex variable, calculus of residues, series expansions, integral transforms and applications.""Thermodynamic properties of systems of many particles obeying Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac, and Bose-Einstein statistics; microcanonical, canonical, and grand canonical ensembles and their application to physical problems; density matrices; introduction to phase transitions; renormalization group theory; kinetic theory and fluctuations.""Quantitative description of biological systems using basic physical laws, including a brief discussion of a variety of biophysical techniques.  Topics include:  thermodynamics, chemical equilibrium, gene expression, structure and physical properties of nucleic acids and proteins, folding of nucleic acids and proteins, chemical kinetics, catalysis, allosteric enzymes, cell membrane structure and physical properties, and machines in cell membranes.""Theory of groups and group representations; introduction to both point and continuous groups, and their applications in physics.""Basic elements of quantum theory, Fermi statistics, motion of electrons in periodic structures, crystal structure, energy bands, equilibrium carrier concentration and doping, excess carriers and recombination, carrier transport at low and high fields, space charge limited current, photo-conductivity in solids, phonons, optical properties, amorphous semiconductors, heterostructures, and surface effects. Laboratory experiments on optical properties, carrier lifetimes, mobility, defect density, doping density, photo-conductivity, diffusion length of carriers.""P-n junctions, band-bending theory, tunneling phenomena, Schottky barriers, heterojunctions, bipolar transistors, field-effect transistors, negative-resistance devices and optoelectronic devices.""Tensor analysis and differential geometry developed and used to formulate Einstein field equations. Schwarzschild and Kerr solutions. Other advanced topics may include gravitational radiation, particle production by gravitational fields, alternate gravitational theories, attempts at unified field theories, cosmology."Use of modern computational techniques to analyze topics in classical and modern physics.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Cell and Molecular Biophysics.  Physical techniques used to characterize the structure, dynamics and properties of biomolecules with emphasis on single molecule techniques.""Variational principles, Lagrange's equations, Hamilton's canonical equations, canonical transformations, Hamilton-Jacobi theory, infinitesimal transformations, classical field theory, canonical perturbation theory, classical chaos.""Electrostatics, magnetostatics, boundary value problems, Maxwell's equations, wave phenomena in macroscopic media, wave guides.""Special theory of relativity, least action and motion of charged particles in electromagnetic fields, radiation, collisions between charged particles, multipole fields, radiation damping."Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest.Topics of current interest."First semester of a full-year course. Postulates of quantum mechanics; time-dependent and time-independent Schrodinger equations for one-,two-, and three-dimensional systems; theory of angular momentum; Rayleigh-Schrodinger time-independent perturbation theory."Continuation of 591. Variational theorem and WKB method; time-dependent perturbation theory and 2nd quantization of the EM field in Coulomb gauge; method of partial waves and Born approximation for scattering by central potentials; identical particles and symmetry; Dirac and Klein-Gordon equation for free particles; path integral formalism.Individually directed study of research-level problems for students electing the nonthesis M.S. degree option."Quasiparticles in condensed matter: phonons, magnons, photons, electrons. Quantum theory of interacting many body systems: Green's functions and diagrammatic techniques.""Microscopic few-body and many-body theory; theory of effective Hamiltonians; relativistic nuclear physics; nuclear effects in hadron-nucleus, lepton-nucleus, and nucleus-nucleus reactions."Quark model; Quantum Chromodynamics IQCD); perturbation methods for QCD; effective field theories for pions and nucleons; finite temperature field theories; quark-gluon plasma; phase transitions in QCD."First semester of a full year course. Properties of leptons, bosons, and quarks and their interactions; quantum chromodynamics, Glashow-Weinberg-Salam model, grand unification theories, supersymmetry; modern theoretical techniques and tests of the Standard Model.""Continuation of 637. Properties of leptons, bosons, and quarks and their interactions; quantum chromodynamics, Glashow-Weinberg-Salam model, grand unification theories, supersymmetry, and superstring theory; modern theoretical techniques.""Modeling of the dynamics of complex systems on multiple scales: Classical and dissipative molecular dynamics, stochastic modeling and Monte-Carlo simulation; coarse grained nonlinear dynamics, interface propagation and spatial pattern formation."Topics of current interest.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Topics of current interest.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Topics of current interest.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Topics of current interest.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Topics of current interest.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Topics of current interest.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Topics of current interest.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Courses on advanced topics and recent developments.Courses on advanced topics and recent developments.Courses on advanced topics and recent developments.Courses on advanced topics and recent developments.Courses on advanced topics and recent developments.Courses on advanced topics and recent developments.Quantization of fields (canonical and path integral); Feynman rules; introduction to gauge theories; Quantum Electrodynamics; radiative corrections; renormalization and renormalization group.Continuation of 681. Systematics of renormalization; renormalization group methods; symmetries; spontaneous symmetry breaking; non-abelian gauge theories; the Standard Model and beyond; special topics.Graduate research."Photosynthesis, respiration, and other aspects of plant metabolism.""Plant nuclear and organelle genomes; regulation of gene expression; hormone signaling; organization, function, and development of plant cells and subcellular structures; regulation of plant growth and development."Research seminars by faculty and graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Diagnosis of all types of plant health problems caused by diseases, insects, weeds, nutrient deficiencies and toxicities,   herbicide injury, and environmental stress. Emphasis is on acquiring practical skills. Students will gain experience in written and   oral communication.""Braun. Principles underlying the nature, diagnosis, and management of plant diseases. Laboratory complements lecture topics and provides experience in plant disease diagnosis."Nature of insects and pathogens of forest and shade trees; their role in the dynamics of natural and     managed forest ecosystems; and the management of indigenous and exotic pests.Laboratory experience working with insect and fungal pests of trees.Identification and biology of important diseases and insect pests of turfgrasses. Development of integrated pest management programs in various turfgrass environments."Overview of plant-associated bacteria including their ecology, diversity, and the physiological and molecular mechanisms involved with their interactions with plants. The course covers bacterial plant pathogens and pathogenesis, nitrogen fixation and plant symbioses, biological control and plant growth promotion, bacterial disease diagnosis and management, and approaches to the study of microbial communities in the rhizosphere and on leaves."Deterioration of wood in use by biological and physical agents. Wood preservation and fire retardant treatments. Environmental impact of wood treating.A maximum of 6 credits of Pl P 490 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.A maximum of 6 credits of Pl P 490 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation.A maximum of 6 credits of Pl P 490 may be used toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation."Significance of biotic and abiotic diseases that affect the production and utilization of seeds, during each phase of the seed life cycle: growing, harvesting, conditioning, storing, and planting seed. Mechanisms of seed infection and seed-to-seedling transmission are considered for fungi, bacteria, viruses/viroids, and nematodes. Aspects of epidemiology, management, and host-pathogen relationships are discussed. Emphases include the role of seed health testing in the global seed industry for quality control and phytosanitary certification, as well as the use of seed treatments to manage seedborne and soilborne pathogens and pests. Concurrent enrollment in PL P 494L/594L (Seed Pathology Laboratory) is strongly encouraged (on-campus students only).   Credit may not be obtained for both Pl P 494/594 and STB/Pl P 592."Laboratory in seed pathology. Seed health testing methods; effects of seed treatments and seed conditioning on seedborne pathogens."Baum, Whitham. Introduction to mechanisms of plant-parasite interaction. Genetics and molecular genetics of plant disease resistance and pathogenicity.""Braun. Principles underlying the nature, diagnosis, and management of plant diseases. Laboratory complements lecture topics and provides experience in plant disease diagnosis.""Applications of Integrated Crop Management principles (including plant pathology, entomology, and horticulture) to tropical cropping systems. Familiarization with a variety of tropical agroecosystems and Costa Rican culture is followed by 10-day tour of Costa Rican agriculture during spring break, then writeup of individual projects.""Durable, least-toxic strategies for managing weeds, pathogens, and insect pests, with emphasis on underlying ecological processes.""Nutter. Theory and practice related to the ecology and epidemiology of plant disease epidemics.  Interactions among host and   pathogen populations as affected by the environment are quantified with respect to time and space.  Analysis of ecological and   host and pathogen genetic factors that alter the course of plant disease epidemics.  Risk assessment theory, disease forecasting,   and modeling the impact of biotic plant stresses on yield and quality are also emphasized."Identification and biology of important diseases and insect pests of turfgrasses. Development of integrated pest management programs in various turfgrass environments."Morphology, anatomy, identification, management, and life cycles of common plant-parasitic nematodes; host parasite interactions; recent advances in plant nematology.""Practical skills of sample collection, processing, extraction, and identification of plant-parasitic nematodes from soil and roots; other techniques will be discussed.""Overview of plant-associated bacteria including their ecology, diversity, and the physiological and molecular mechanisms involved with their interactions with plants. The course covers bacterial plant pathogens and pathogenesis, nitrogen fixation and plant symbioses, biological control and plant growth promotion, bacterial disease diagnosis and management, and approaches to the study of microbial communities in the rhizosphere and on leaves.""Munkvold. Occurrence and management of diseases during seed production, harvest, conditioning, storage, and planting. Emphasis     on epidemiology, disease management in the field, seed treatment, effects of conditioning on seed health, and seed health testing.   Credit may not be obtained for both Pl P/STB 592 and Pl P 594.""Significance of biotic and abiotic diseases that affect the production and utilization of seeds, during each phase of the seed life cycle: growing, harvesting, conditioning, storing, and planting seed. Mechanisms of seed infection and seed-to-seedling transmission are considered for fungi, bacteria, viruses/viroids, and nematodes. Aspects of epidemiology, management, and host-pathogen relationships are discussed. Emphases include the role of seed health testing in the global seed industry for quality control and phytosanitary certification, as well as the use of seed treatments to manage seedborne and soilborne pathogens and pests. Concurrent enrollment in PL P 494L/594L (Seed Pathology Laboratory) is strongly encouraged (on-campus students only).   Credit may not be obtained for both Pl P 494/594 and STB/Pl P 592."Laboratory in seed pathology. Seed health testing methods; effects of seed treatments and seed conditioning on seedborne pathogens.Advanced study of virus host-cell interactions. Molecular mechanisms of viral replication and pathogenesis.Skill building to improve oral presentation fundamentals for graduate students in biological sciences. Principles and guidance in both personal speaking style and maximizing impact of presentation software. In-depth lectures and class discussions on all aspects of presentation skills. Video and anonymous peer review of individual speeches."Diagnosis of plant diseases, plant disease assessment methods, and the integration of disease management into commercial crop production practices. Objectives are to familiarize students with common diseases of Midwest crops and landscape plants, and to provide experience in disease diagnosis. Field trips include commercial operations, agricultural research facilities, and ornamental plantings.""Seminal and current research in molecular and physiological aspects of plant interactions with pathogens,     including mechanisms of pathogenesis, host-pathogen recognition and host defense, with an emphasis on critical evaluation of     primary literature.  Students also complete a research proposal writing and peer review exercise.""Advanced topics in plant pathology, including biological control, cultural control, resistance gene deployment, genetic   engineering for disease resistance, chemical control, integrated pest management, emerging diseases, fungal genetics, insect   vector biology, professional communications, etc."F.S.SS."Introduction to the discipline and sub-fields of Political Science, including an introduction to analytical thinking, and research skills relevant to political science. Orientation to university, college, and departmental structure, policies, and procedures; student roles and responsibilities; degree planning and career awareness.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Fundamentals of American democracy; constitutionalism; federalism; rights and duties of citizens; executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government; elections, public opinion, interest groups, and political parties.""Introduction to moral controversies surrounding political issues such as violence, deception, corruption, civil disobedience, democracy, justice, equality, and freedom. Students will read classic and contemporary texts and consider political applications.""Basic concepts and major theories; application to selected political systems, including non-western political systems.""Dynamics of interstate relations pertaining to nationalism, the nation state; peace and war; foreign policy making; the national interest; military capability and strategy; case studies of transnational issues, such as population, food, energy, and terrorism."Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Techniques of quantitative and qualitative political research and analysis. Development and analysis of concepts and theories. Methods of data collection, research design, and critical thinking. Applications of statistics to political research.""Empirical theories and descriptions of political behavior, including decision-making, opinion, and attitudes, with an emphasis on groups and political elites.""The formation of political opinions and attitudes, political participation, and voting behavior of the general public, and their influences on American politics; polling as a means of assessing public opinions and behaviors.""Role of state and local governments in the American federal system. Structures of participation: political parties, elections, interest groups. Major governmental institutions: legislative, executive, and judicial. Structure and functions of local governments."Half-semester courses on selected topical issues in American government and politics.   Designated repeat in Pol S 312 is not permitted. Use of Pol S 312 credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.Half-semester course on selected topical issues in theory and methods in political science.   Designated repeat in Pol S 313 is not permitted. Use of Pol S 313 credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.Half-semester course on selected topical issues in comparative politics.   Designated repeat in Pol S 314 is not permitted. Use of Pol S 314 credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.Half-semester course on selected topical issues in international relations.   Designated repeat in Pol S 315 is not permitted. Use of Pol S 315 credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.Methods and techniques of political campaigns in general elections. Supervised participation in candidate and political party campaign activities required."An evaluation of the American judicial system as it relates to controversial topics emphasizing the relationship between law and politics.  Primary emphasis on topics such as statutory construction, judicial review, the proper role of the judiciary, vagueness and ambiguity in law, competing constitutional philosophies, executive branch concerns, and relative power of different branches.   Credit for both Pol S 319 and 230 may not be applied toward graduation.""An overview of the American judicial process.  Emphasis on specific topics such as application of constitutional rights to the states (particularly the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendments), mechanics of judicial opinions, constitutional philosophies of Supreme Court Justices, decisions of first impression, and the value and scope of precedent.""Examination of competing Americans' conceptions of democracy as strategies for responding to the racial, religious, ethnic, gender, and economic diversity of the inhabitants of America.  Connections to contemporary debates about topics such immigration, affirmative action, multicultural education, religion, and minority representation.""The relationship between politics and society with emphasis on American society. Discussion of theories of inequality, power, social movements, elites, ruling classes, democracy, and capitalism.""Examines the history and political dynamics of public science and technology policies. Examines differences in political and technological orientations. Assessment of the roles of politics, media, engineering, science, and private business in the formation public policies that put heavy reliance on or seek to advance science and technology.""An exploration of competing conceptions of liberty in American political thought and debates about how liberty should be protected by the law. Contemporary debates about topics such as health care, drugs, property, speech, religion, and sex."Examination of economic and political development as they relate to the political process of developing states. Impact of social and technological change on political systems of developing areas. Some case studies."Political institutions, processes, and contemporary issues. Selected countries examined intensively to illustrate generalizations. Role of parties, military, church, human rights, women, environmental issues, interest groups, ideology, and globalization.""How agendas come to be set in public policy, theories describing the policy-making process, forces molding policy choices and the impact of such choices.""Political, economic, and social factors that affect immigration policy in the United States and abroad.  Systematic analysis and implications of different types of immigration policies in countries sending and receiving immigrants.""Comparative study of political institutions of Europe and the European Union; emphasis on parties, elections, and governmental structures. Substance and process of public policies in selected problem areas."Nation-states of the former Soviet Union. Analysis of Soviet Communist system 1917-85 and the politics and revolutionary conflict leading to the dissolution of the Soviet Union from 1985 through 1991. Problems of post-Soviet nation-states of Russia and Central Eurasia since 1991."Introduction to the Middle East as a region and to issues of political importance to the Middle East and its place in the world. Topics covered include Islam, regional conflicts and alliances, local leaders, economic issues, and gender and social relations."Humanitarianism as a system of thought and a system of intervention in conflict and post-conflict situations: role of humanitarian organizations and actors in addressing human suffering caused by conflict or war military action as a form of humanitarian intervention."Introduction to essential theoretical concepts and approaches, both classical and contemporary on world politics including realism, empiricism, liberalism, and postpositivism; for example, war and conflict, peace and cooperation, political economy, crisis decision-making, systemic theory, dependence and interdependence.""The major theoretical approaches in security policy -- strategy and deterrence, game theory, bargaining theory, compellance, and coercive diplomacy, and crisis diplomacy. Illustration of these various approaches through historical and contemporary cases.""U.S. foreign policy since World War II with emphasis on changing American values in foreign policy, the role of the President, Congress, and the bureaucracy in policy making, and a survey of current foreign policy issues and problems.""Examination of contemporary U.S. foreign policy issues (e.g., U.S. policy in the Middle East; defense budgeting in the post-Cold War era; conventional and nuclear arms control policy). The course will explore alternate methods to analyze policy, survey the evolution of each issue, and discuss different policy alternatives.""Theory and practice of representation and deliberation in the legislative branch of the republic; operations of Congress in terms of its committees, leadership, legislative and oversight processes, partisan politics, electoral campaigns, service to local and special electoral campaigns, service to local and special interests, and interactions with the President.""Creation and historical development of the office of chief executive; character and behavior of past chief executives; selection and control; powers, roles, functions; executive staff; relations with Congress, press, public opinion.""Exploration of the genesis, purpose, and power of judicial review, federal common law, judicial confirmation, merit of strict construction of the Constitution, and qualifications to serving on Courts; judicial activism and the infusion of politics into courts.""Course surveys the influence of mass media organizations, forms, techniques, and technologies on the practices and expectations of American politics.  Evaluates the role of media in the political process, exploring the extents to which media promotes or discourages political participation.  Topics will examine the influence and political uses of news coverage, political advertising, political debates, talk radio, film, the Internet, and media spectacles.""Nature of political parties and interest groups, their relation to each other, and their effects on American politics.  Topics include party identification, party organization and mobilization, factionalism, lobbying, campaign contributions and financing, and the effects of special interests on public law.""The interaction of religion and politics in the U.S. from both an historical and contemporary perspective, as well   as the role of religion in politics internationally.""A survey of the historic and contemporary administrative realities that contribute to the unique challenges of public governance at the administrative and managerial levels of international, national, state, and local government. This introductory course explores the essential issues and competencies involved in the efficient, effective, and ethical provision of public goods and services. Critical topics addressed in the course include crisis management, intergovernmental relations, social equity, public-private partnerships, and privatization.""Introduction to the theoretical perspectives on international political economy. Exploration of specific issues such as the changing international trade regime, international finance, and Third World development under conditions of globalization.""Major ideologies relation to conservation and ecology. Processes, participants, and institutions involved in state, national, and global environmental policymaking. Case studies of environmental controversies and proposals for policy reform."Examination of the entry and participation of women in politics in the United States and other countries including a focus on contemporary issues and strategies for change through the political process.Taken in conjunction with 300- or 400-level Political Science courses.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Supervised study in an aspect of discipline while traveling or located in a foreign country.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing work period."Theories and practices of the American federal system. Politics and policy making among federal, state, and local governments."Backgrounds of candidates for state and national elections; selected speeches and issues; persuasive strategies and techniques of individual speakers.Development of the United States Constitution through judicial action; influence of public law and judicial interpretations upon American government and society."Leading Supreme Court cases interpreting the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment. Emphasis on religion, speech, privacy, due process, and equal protection."Development of the principles of international law of peace and war; analysis of theories concerning its nature and fundamental conceptions; its relation to national law; problems of international legislation and codification."Study of original texts in political thought ranging from the classical period to the renaissance. Topics such as justice, freedom, virtue, the allocation of political power, the meaning of democracy, human nature, and natural law.""Study of original texts in political thought ranging from the Reformation to the French Revolution and its aftermath. Topics such as justice, freedom, rights, democracy, toleration, property, power, skepticism, and normative views of international politics.""Exploration of political implications of coastal policy. Issues include: ""Carrying capacity,"" zoning, regulation of human development activities, trade-offs between conservation and jobs, the quality of coastal lifestyle, ways in which citizens participate in policy for coastal areas."Various theoretical approaches to explain foreign policy making and behavior through the use of case studies of selected nations."Private and public organizations such as the United Nations, other specialized agencies, and multinational organizations, and their influence on our daily lives.""Application of economics to political science in the study of nonmarket decision-making. Behavior of bureaucrats, elected officials, and voters. Market failure, collective action, representative democracies, direct democracies, logrolling, voter paradoxes, and game theory.""Literature and research on organizational behavior and management theory with emphasis on applied aspects of managing contemporary public sector organizations. Topics include distinctions between public and private organizations, leadership, productivity, employee motivation, organizational structure, and organizational change.""Constitutional problems of delegation of governmental powers, elements of fair administrative procedures, judicial control over administrative determinations.""Diverse perspectives on the changing roles and relationships of business, government, and society so as to open the way for more effective policy decisions on corporate-government affairs. Topics may include the changing economy; transformation of workplace and community conditions; consumerism; social responsibilities of businesses; economic policies and regulations; and politics in the business-government relationship.""Study of decision making approaches and application to case studies.  Topics such as the different roles of public officials, proper scope and use of administrative discretion, and the admissibility of religious, political, and philosophical commitments in governmental decision making.""Comparisons of government bureaucratic structures and processes in major world regions, trends and issues of administrative and management reforms, globalization and other contemporary challenges to state administrative structures and policies, skills needed to evaluate and implement public management reforms.""The impact of computers, the Internet, and the World Wide Web on politics and policy.  The positive and negative effects on information technology (IT) on selected topics such as freedom, power and control, privacy, civic participation, the sense of ""community,"" ""virtual cities,"" interest group behavior, the new media, campaigns, elections, and voting will be examined.""Special studies in the political institutions, processes and policies of American, foreign, and international governments. Also, studies in traditional and behavioral political theory. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   No more than 9 credits of Pol S 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Special studies in the political institutions, processes and policies of American, foreign, and international governments. Also, studies in traditional and behavioral political theory. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   No more than 9 credits of Pol S 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Special studies in the political institutions, processes and policies of American, foreign, and international governments. Also, studies in traditional and behavioral political theory. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   No more than 9 credits of Pol S 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Special studies in the political institutions, processes and policies of American, foreign, and international governments. Also, studies in traditional and behavioral political theory. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   No more than 9 credits of Pol S 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Special studies in the political institutions, processes and policies of American, foreign, and international governments. Also, studies in traditional and behavioral political theory. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   No more than 9 credits of Pol S 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Extra study for any 300-Special studies in the political institutions, processes and policies of American, foreign, and international governments. Also, studies in traditional and behavioral political theory. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   No more than 9 credits of Pol S 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Special studies in the political institutions, processes and policies of American, foreign, and international governments. Also, studies in traditional and behavioral political theory. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   No more than 9 credits of Pol S 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Special studies in the political institutions, processes and policies of American, foreign, and international governments. Also, studies in traditional and behavioral political theory. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   No more than 9 credits of Pol S 490 may be counted toward graduation."Written under the supervision of a Political Science faculty advisor.Undergraduate teaching experience through assisting an instructor with an introductory course in political science. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Undergraduate research experience through assisting on a scholarly project with an instructor in political science. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Required of all cooperative education students. Students must register for this course prior to commencing each work period."Work experience with a specific nongovernmental or governmental agency at the local, state, national, or international level, combined with academic work under faculty supervision. Use of credit in Pol S major and minor is limited. See Undergraduate Study for information.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Scope and methods of political science. Introduction to theoretical approaches and analytical reasoning in political science. Relationship of theory and data. Research design."An overview of the major theoretical and empirical works in the study of international politics and foreign policy. Among the major theoretical approaches surveyed and applied to international politics are realism, neo-realism, liberalism, functionalism, rational choice theory, game theory, and decision-making theory. Seminal writings by leading scholars will be reviewed.""Major theoretic approaches to the study of comparative politics -- varying concepts and definitions of society and policy, administrative traditions, institutional arrangements, political behavior, etc. Contrasting research method designs.""A presentation of the major theories and research on American government and politics. Substantive topics include modern democratic theory, institutional performance, and mass political behavior. A variety of research methodologies are examined, including normative theory, behavioralism, and rational choice analysis.""An overview of the major theoretical approaches and empirical methods relevant to the study of public policy. Emphasis is placed on agenda setting, policy formation, policy sustainability, and policy analysis. Seminal writings by leading scholars will be reviewed. Leading quantitative and qualitative methodological tools for analyzing policy are presented.""Comparative analysis of state political systems.  Role of interest groups, political parties, legislatures, courts, and governors in state politics.  Possible determinants of public policy outputs at the state level.""Theories and practices of the American federal system. Politics and policy making among federal, state, and local governments.""Evaluation of the biorenewables field as it relates to the areas of law and policy. Primary emphasis on the following topics: concerns that motivated the development and expansion of the biorenewables field, a history of the interactions between biorenewable pathways. U.S. law and policy and controversies that have arisen from these interactions and their effects.""Evaluation of the international biorenewables field as it relates to the areas of law and policy. Primary emphasis on the following topics: concerns that motivated the development and expansion of the field by adopting countries, a history of the interactions between biorenewable pathways. Law and policy in adopting countries and international controversies that have arisen from these interactions and their effects.""An in-depth survey of the theoretical, empirical, and methodological works concerning mass political behavior in the United States. Substantive topics include political attitudes and ideologies, public opinion and voting behavior, and political psychology. Methods for studying mass behavior include survey research and experimental approaches.""Study of original texts in political thought ranging from the Reformation to the French Revolution and its aftermath. Topics such as justice, freedom, rights, democracy, toleration, property, power, skepticism, and normative views of international politics.""Overview of the legal and policy context of E-government development.  Topics include the legal and regulatory policies on information management in governments, and public policies that  use information technologies to address economic and social concerns and their impacts on citizens and governmental organizations."Legal and ethical issues in computer security. State and local codes and regulations. Privacy issues."Examination of theories of justice proposed by contemporary political philosophers. Analysis of the philosophical foundations of perspectives such as liberalism, libertarianism, communitarianism, socialism, feminism. Normative assessments of socio-political institutions.""Exploration of political implications of coastal policy. Issues include: ""Carrying capacity,"" zoning, regulation of human development activities, tradeoffs between conservation and jobs, the quality of coastal lifestyle, and ways in which citizens participate in policy for coastal areas.""Examines how, why and to what effect governments deal with substantive policy problems differently.  Environmental factors, ideologies, cultures, domestic policy making processes, and interest groups."Various theoretical approaches to explain foreign policy making and behavior through the use of case studies of selected nations."Examination of policy-making and governance in a separation of powers system. Interaction between the chief executive, the legislature, administrative agencies, and the public. How political and legal forces affect policy makers and are reflected in public policies and programs.""An examination of the social, political, intellectual, and environmental factors contributing to the historical development and central issues of American Public Administration. Exploration of classic and contemporary texts of public administration emphasizing constitutional and civic roles of public servants, administrative responsibility in democratic governance and justice, and essential frameworks to identify managerial skills, perspectives, and resources for effective, equitable public service.""Discussion of contemporary issues and perspectives shaping the policy development and management of national and international nonprofit organizations. Topics include an historic overview of nonprofit and philanthropic perspectives; exploration of nonprofit organization roles in public service provision; review of the legal framework influencing nonprofit governance; and consideration of capacity building issues such as strategic planning, board development, fundraising, human resources, and volunteer management.""Major theories of administrative organization, including motivations of administrators and organizations, comparisons of organizational arrangements, factors affecting organizational arrangements, and formal and informal decision-making structures.""Topics such as the fiscal role of government in a mixed economy; evaluation of sources of public revenue and credit; administrative, political, and institutional aspects of the budget and the budgetary process; alternative budget formats; skills required to analyze public revenue and spending. Spreadsheet use required.""Course discusses the history and development of high performance personnel administration in the public and nonprofit sectors regarding strategic planning, employee rights and responsibilities, performance assessment, collective bargaining, and civil service systems. Emphasized basic competencies in the essential human resource management tools in the areas of recruitment, retention, employee development, compensation, discipline, and conflict resolution.""Integration, application, and utilization of public administration and public policy concepts in the interpretation of results and effectiveness of public programs and the prediction of consequences for policymakers and administrators.""Literature and research on organizational behavior and management theory with emphasis on applied aspects of managing contemporary public sector organizations. Topics include distinctions between public and private organizations, leadership, productivity, employee motivation, organizational structure, and organizational change.""Constitutional problems of delegation of governmental powers, elements of fair administrative procedures, judicial control over administrative determinations.""Diverse perspectives on the changing roles and relationships of business, government, and society so as to open the way for more effective policy decisions on corporate-government affairs. Topics may include the changing economy; transformation of workplace and community conditions; consumerism; social responsibilities of businesses; economic policies and regulations; and politics in the business-government relationship.""Study of decision making approaches and application to case studies.  Topics such as the different roles of public officials, proper scope and use of administrative discretion, and the admissibility of religious, political, and philosophical commitments in governmental decision making.""An overview of the international political economy since the end of World War II. Special emphasis on national (primarily U.S.) development assistance and agricultural/food politics and policies, and those of the international food organizations, the World Bank, and the regional development banks.""Comparisons of government bureaucratic structures and processes in major world regions, trends and issues of administrative and management reforms, globalization and other contemporary challenges to state administrative structures and policies, skills needed to evaluate and implement public management reforms.""The impact of computers, the Internet, and the World Wide Web on politics and policy.  The positive and negative effects on information technology (IT) on selected topics such as freedom, power and control, privacy, civic participation, the sense of ""community,"" ""virtual cities,"" interest group behavior, the new media, campaigns, elections, and voting will be examined.""Supervised internship with administrative agencies, legislative organizations, judicial branch offices, and nonprofit groups."Fundamental psychological concepts derived from the application of the scientific method to the study of behavior and mental processes. Applications of psychology.Laboratory to accompany 101.Program requirements and degree/career options. Required of psychology majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Topics include orientation to academic program requirements, career awareness, strategies for successful transition to college, connections with other disciplines, and applying psychology via service learning opportunities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Efficient methods of time management, goal setting and motivation, and other learning strategies such as note-taking, reading, and test preparation.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Continued development of academic learning skills with an emphasis on motivation and application of learning strategies.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Life-span development of physical traits, cognition, intelligence, language, social and emotional behavior, personality, and adjustment.""Survey of theories and research methods of psychology applied to the workplace. Consideration of employee selection, training, performance evaluation, leadership, work groups, employee motivation, job attitudes and behaviors, organizational culture, organizational development, human factors, and job design from the scientist-practitioner approach.""Individual human behavior in social contexts. Emphasis on social judgments and decisions, attitudes, perceptions of others, social influence, aggression, stereotypes, and helping."Beginning level supervised research experience in a faculty laboratory.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Overview of the principal research techniques used in psychology with an emphasis on the statistical analysis of psychological data."Discussion of and experience in designing research studies, collecting and analyzing data, and preparing research reports in psychology.""Survey of basic concepts in the neurosciences with emphasis on brain mechanisms mediating sensory processes, arousal, motivation, learning, and abnormal behavior.""Survey of the physiology and psychology of human sensory systems including vision, audition, smell, taste, the skin senses, and the vestibular senses."Survey of fundamental concepts and theories related to learning and memory derived from human and animal research."Theory and research on motivation at biological, environmental, and psychological levels. Topics include emotion, eating, sex, music, addictions, incentives, goal performance, personality, coping, self-determination and purpose.""Biologically based examination of the effects of drugs on behavior and social interactions, including recreational drugs and drugs used in the treatment of psychiatric and neurological disorders.""Overview of human cognition, including sensation and perception, attention, memory, education, language, and judgment and decision making.""Understanding human reasoning and decision making, including evaluating evidence, judging probabilities, emotional influences, and social dilemmas, with emphasis on the mechanisms that underlie decision making.""Classroom learning with emphasis on theories of learning and cognition, and instructional techniques. Major emphasis on measurement theory and the classroom assessment of learning outcomes.""Psychopathology of children and adolescents,including childhood depression and anxiety disorders. Consideration of multiple probable causes and corresponding therapies.""Survey of theory and research related to major biological, interpersonal, and cultural issues affecting girls' and women's psychological development and behavior.""Historical, political, and social contexts of psychological and mental health constructs in terms of their validity and utility for use in Latino/a people in the U.S.  Unique aspects of psychological functioning particular to Latino/a peoples in the U.S.""Survey of psychological theory and research investigating religious and spiritual attitudes, beliefs and practices.""Understanding human behavior and cognition in the context of modern technologies.  Focus on emergent interactive technologies, human computer interaction, user centered design, usability analysis, and usability testing."Historical and contemporary theory and research on development and expression of personality with a focus on normal functioning."How people understand themselves and others, including attribution, social categories and schemas, the self, social inference, stereotypes, and prejudice.""A survey of small group theory and research from an interdisciplinary, social psychological perspective.""Survey of topics in the interface between psychology and the legal system including but not limited to Miranda warning, confessions, police interrogation, lie detection, juries, eyewitness identification, false memories, and the death penalty.""Theories and research on the psychological mechanisms (e.g., attitudes, perceptions, emotions, arousal) by which media influence children and adults. Topics include media violence, educational media, advertising, music, video games, media literacy, and ratings."Philosophy and science backgrounds of psychology. Development of theories and causes of events in academic and applied psychology."Examination of the neuroanatomical foundation of cognition, affect, and action from a neurological perspective. Focus on basic and applied research with neurological patients.""Examination of the application of the principles of evolutionary biology to the understanding of human behavior.  Evolutionary perspectives on brain development, cognition, language, mating behavior, sex differences, altruism, artistic behavior, and criminal behavior are explored.  Arguments by those critical of the evolutionary approach to psychology are also examined.""Introduction to psycholinguistics. Topics may include origin of language, speech perception, language comprehension, reading, bilingualism, brain bases of language, and computational modeling of language processes.""Overview of the major counseling theories and techniques, with emphasis on the key concepts of each theory, the role of the counselor, therapeutic goals, and the main techniques derived from each theory.""Learn basic counseling skills such as active listening, reflecting feelings, empathy, confrontation, immediacy and self-disclosure.  Supervised practice using basic counseling skills.""Principles of psychological measurement, including concepts of reliability and validity; interpretation of scores; factors influencing performance; construction and use of measures of ability, achievement, and personality.""Theory, content and methods of industrial psychology related to the effective operation of organizations.  Application of psychology principles to topics including different approaches used to select employees, how to conduct performance appraisals, and how to train and keep employees safe. Work attitudes and behaviors of employees as well as relevant legal issues. Statistics including regression and correlation are used.""Description of major forms of psychopathology including anxiety, mood disorders, personality disorders, substance abuse, and schizophrenia. Causes and maintenance of abnormal behavior."Current topics in psychological research and practice in the following areas."Theories and research concerning the functions, development, and deterioration of close relationships. Influence of psychological processes on friendship, romantic, marital, and family relationships. Topics include mate selection, interdependence, trust and commitment, power and dominance in relationships, sexuality, divorce, gender roles, and family interaction.""Application of psychological theory and research methods to issues in physical health. Psychological factors in illness prevention, health maintenance, treatment of illness, recovery from injury and illness, and adjustment to chronic illness."Theory and research on development and occurrence of human aggression; implications for prevention and treatment."Examination of the ways that cultural beliefs, values, and affordances shape cognitive, developmental, social and other psychological phenomena, as well as the forces that shape and change culture."Supervised reading in an area of psychology. Writing requirement.   No more than 9 credits of Psych 490 may be counted toward a degree in psychology.Supervised research in an area of psychology. Primarily for students intending to pursue graduate education.   No more than 9 credits of Psych 491 may be counted toward a degree in psychology.Supervised fieldwork in one of the following applied psychology settings.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than 9 credits of Psych 492 may be counted toward a degree in psychology.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Ethical issues, research design, sampling design, measurement issues, power and precision analysis, interpretation of statistical results in non-experimental, quasi-experimental, and experimental research, use of statistical packages.""Methods and issues in applied psychological research. Role of theory in research, fidelity of measurement, selection of subjects, sampling, ethical issues, experimenter bias, data collection methods, power analysis, and professional standards for writing research articles. Emphasis on research methodological issues, not statistical issues.""Examination of the neuroanatomical foundation of cognition, affect, and action from a neurological perspective. Focus on basic and applied research with neurological patients.""Theoretical models and empirical research in human cognition including perception, attention, memory, concepts/categorization, imagery, and judgment and decision making.""Fundamentals of drug-behavior interactions with emphasis on psychoactive drugs and their use in experimental, therapeutic, and social settings."Psychological models and related neurological substrates underlying cognition in normal and brain-damaged individuals."Biological, behavioral, perceptual, cognitive and social issues relevant to human computer interactions.""Basics of hypothesis testing, experimental design, analysis and interpretation of data, and the ethical principles of human research as they apply to research in human computer interaction.""Learning, cognition, and memory in educational/training settings.""Theories, research, and current issues regarding the intersection of development and disabilities. Investigation of interventions with individuals and families. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Principles of psychological measurement, including concepts of reliability and validity; interpretation of scores; factors influencing performance; test construction and use of measures of intelligence, ability, achievement, vocational interest, and personality. Ethical and multicultural issues in measurement.""Supervised practice in integration of clinical interviewing, behavioral observation, and administration, scoring, and interpreting individual tests of cognitive function.""Advanced analysis of contemporary theory and research on personality measurement, development, heritability, and social expression.""Examination of theoretical perspectives and current research pertinent to the major forms of adult dysfunction including: adjustment, anxiety, mood, somatoform, dissociative, sexual and gender identity, personality, schizophrenic, eating, and substance abuse disorders.""Principles, concepts, and methods of personality assessment. Though not a practicum course, exposure is given to a variety of objective, projective, and situational tests.""Current theories, methods, and research in social psychology with an emphasis on cognitive and interpersonal processes such as attribution, social cognition, attitude change, attraction, aggression, and social comparison."Guided reading on special topics or individual research projects in the following areas.Seminar in the following areas.Specialized quantitative methods for social and behavioral research problems in the following areas.Specialized quantitative methods for social and behavioral research problems.Specialized quantitative methods for social and behavioral research problems.Specialized quantitative methods for social and behavioral research problems.Seminar in the following areas in social psychology.Seminar in the following areas in counseling psychology."Full-time, non-clinical, supervised experience in a setting relevant to psychology. Intended for master's degree level internships."Seminar in the following areas in cognitive psychology.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Origins of psychology in philosophical, medical, and related thought. Development as an independent discipline in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as a science and as a practice including traditional and contemporary theory and philosophy.""Rationale for and interpretation of random coefficient models. Strategies for the analysis of multi-level and panel data including models for random intercepts, random slopes, and growth curves.""Overview of major counseling theories with emphases upon: key concepts of theories, the role of the counselor, and applications of theory in fostering client change.""Development of basic counseling skills and techniques through observation, role-playing, case studies, and supervised counseling sessions.""Theoretical views, research, and issues in career development through the life span. Methods of career counseling, including appraisal interviewing, assessment, test interpretation, and use of information sources.""Theory, research, ethical issues, and therapeutic considerations relevant to group counseling. Participation in lab exercises for development of group counseling skills and observation of ongoing groups.""Orientation to teaching of psychology at college level: academic issues and problems, instructional and evaluative techniques."Supervised practice and experience in the following fields of specialization in applied psychology.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Research seminar in the following areas.Full time supervised predoctoral internship experience in a setting relevant to counseling psychology.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Introduction to public relations in business, government and non-profit organizations; functions, processes, and management; ethics, public opinion and theory.""The use of primary and secondary research for situations, organizations and the public.  Formation and development of strategic plans for public relations and advertising students."Communication and publicity fundamentals and the use of media for publicity purposes. Not available to Greenlee School majors."Developing and writing public relations materials with an emphasis on media relations and news. Techniques addressed include media kits, brochures, newsletters and speeches."Check with Greenlee School for course availability.Developing public relations and public information campaigns for business and social institutions."Independent studies are research-based. Students may study problems associated with a medium, a professional specialization, a philosophical or practical concern, a reportorial method or writing technique, or a special topic in their field. Credit is not given for working on student or professional media without an accompanying research component."Seminars or one-time classes on topics of relevance to students in communication."Required of all Greenlee School majors. A 400-hour (for 3 credits) internship in the student's journalism and mass communication or advertising or public relations specialization. Assessment based on employer evaluations, student reports and faculty reviews. Available only to Greenlee School majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Initial, required internship. A 400-hour (for 3 credits) internship in the student's specialization. Assessment based on employer evaluations, student reports and faculty reviews. Available only to Greenlee School majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Optional internship in the student's specialization. Assessment based on employer evaluations, student reports and faculty reviews. Available only to Greenlee School majors.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""An introduction to the academic study of religions, including myths, beliefs, rituals, values, social forms. Examples chosen from oral cultures and major religions of the world.""Introductory study of the major beliefs, practices, and institutions of American Judaism, Catholicism, Protestantism, and Islam with emphasis on the diversity of religion in America, and attention to issues of gender, race, and class.""Basic overview of the contents of the Old and New Testament in light of their ancient socio-historical background, and with attention to a variety of interpretations and relevance to modern American society.""A survey of the major historical developments in Christian thought and practice that shaped Christianity from the time of Jesus through the late medieval period.  Attention given to significant persons and major events, including those involving relations with Judaism and Islam.""A survey of the major events, issues, and persons that contributed to the Protestant Reformation, the Catholic Counter-Reformation, and the proliferation of Christian denominations.  Attention to selected responses of churches to major sixteenth-early twenty-first century developments.""An explanation of the beliefs, spirit, and practices of Roman Catholicism, including its understanding of God, sacramentality, the human person, and community, and its relationship to other forms of Christianity and other world religions.""An in-depth study of the literature and religion of ancient Israel in light of recent archaeological discoveries, research about the ancient Near East, and a variety of interpretations."A detailed survey of the sacred scriptures of Christianity in light of recent archaeological discoveries and historical research about their Greco-Roman and Jewish background."Examines major challenges to Christianity's understandings of creation posed by the sciences; attention given to the relations of Christianity and science, and to ChristianityÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s responses to ecological issues.""Examination of African-American experience from the perspective of black religion with attention to political, economic, social, theological and artistic expressions, including music, that serve the life of African-American communities.Ì¢‰âÂåù.""Examines the status of women in various religions, feminist critiques of religious structures and belief systems, and contemporary women's spirituality movements.""Survey of global religious belief and practice from an anthropological perspective. Emphasis on myth and ritual, shamanism, magic,   witchcraft, beliefs in spirits, conceptions of the soul, mind and body relationships, and healing and therapeutic practices. Discussion   of religious response to dramatic political and social change; effects of globalization on religious practice.""A study of the religious behavior and attitudes expressed in the literature of Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans and other groups of people living in the U.S. who trace their ancestry to the Spanish-speaking countries of Latin America.""Survey of psychological theory and research investigating religious and spiritual attitudes, beliefs and practices."The value and truth of religious life and belief. Mystical experience; religious faith and language; arguments for God's existence; the problem of evil; miracles; and religion and morality. Historical and contemporary readings."Study of texts, practices, beliefs, historical development, and mutual influence of a variety of the religious traditions of India. Emphasis on Vedic religion and the diversity of traditions of Classical Hinduism;  survey of Buddhist, Jain, Sikh, and South Asian Islamic traditions. Meets International Perspectives Requirement.""The Religious Traditions of China. Chinese religious traditions in ancient and modern expression; indigenous forms of religious practice; development of high/deep traditions of Confucianism and Taoism; impact of religions such as Buddhism, Islam, and Christianity. Religious influences and changes in contemporary China.""An introduction to Islamic religion, culture, and society from 700 to the present.""Investigates different religious ethical theories and traditions of reasoning about practical moral issues (e.g., abortion, the just distribution of wealth, environmental ethics). Explores in detail the relationship between religious beliefs and moral practice.""An historical introduction to the rise of Christianity in the Roman empire, with special attention to the impact of Greco-Roman culture on the thought and practice of Christians and the interaction of early Christians with their contemporaries.""The interaction of religion and politics in the U.S. from both an historical and contemporary perspective, as well   as the role of religion in politics internationally.""Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Greece-Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Greek or Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored.""Bronze Age (Minoan and Mycenaean palatial cultures) and Early Iron Age Greece. (ca 3000-700 BCE). Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Greece-Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Greek or Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored.""Chronological survey of the material culture of the ancient Greece-Roman world and the role of archaeological context in understanding the varied aspects of ancient Greek or Roman culture. Among other topics, economy, architecture, arts and crafts, trade and exchange, religion and burial customs will be explored.""The influence of religion in society, both as a conservator of values and as a force for social change.""Examines biblical roots of and major developments in Catholic social thought.  Contemporary issues such as human rights, economic justice, the environment, and war and peace will be treated using principles of Catholic ethics, social analysis, official church documents, and contributions of notable theologians and activists.""Introduction to concepts of religion and ecology as they appear in different religious traditions, from both a historical and contemporary perspective. Special attention to religious response to contemporary environmental issues.""Exploration of the foundational myths of Goddess spirituality, including historical and cross-cultural female images of the divine and their modern usage by American women."The various Buddhist paths to realize enlightenment and freedom. Special attention to meditation and yoga and their relationship to altered states of consciousness and to social contexts.Topic changes each time offered. Closed to freshmen. Sophomores must have approval of instructor.Examines the variety of theories and methods employed in the study of religion. Application of these methods to various religions of the world.Guided reading and research on special topics selected to meet the needs of advanced students.   No more than 9 credits of Relig 490 may be counted toward graduation.Guided reading and research on special topics selected to meet the needs of advanced students.   No more than 9 credits of Relig 490 may be counted toward graduation.Written under the supervision of a Religious Studies faculty advisor."Survey of global religious belief and practice from an anthropological perspective. Emphasis on myth and ritual, shamanism, magic,   witchcraft, beliefs in spirits, conceptions of the soul, mind and body relationships, and healing and therapeutic practices. Discussion   of religious response to dramatic political and social change; effects of globalization on religious practice."Understanding the nature of quantitative and qualitative research; reviewing the literature; developing research problems and questions; research designs; data collection and analysis issues; evaluating research studies."Statistical concepts and procedures for analyzing educational data; descriptive statistics, correlation, t tests, and chi square with computer applications.""A continuation of statistical concepts and procedures for analyzing educational data, using multiple regression and logistic regression.""Intermediate quantitative research methodology in preparation for carrying out thesis and dissertation research, with an emphasis on the estimation of causal effects using observational data.""Examination of survey design and administration in educational research. Designing surveys; developing, evaluating, and asking survey questions; survey sampling; measuring survey reliability and validity; administering mail and web surveys; decreasing survey nonresponse; conducting post-collection survey data processing; conducting survey research with integrity.""Qualitative research in the human sciences, emphasizing education; principles of qualitative inquiry, including theoretical foundations, research design, and fieldwork."Guided reading and in research and evaluation study on special topic.Supervised on the job field experience."Intensive, concentrated exposure to a special educational research or evaluation problem."Evaluation models and professional standards. Techniques of evaluating educational programs. Emphasis on both theory and practical applications."Exploration of the plurality of frameworks used to conceptualize college access as a social problem (for research, policy, and practice). Development of application of understandings of college access frameworks to policy, practice, and research.""An intensive reading and discussion course focusing on contemporary methodological theory for qualitative inquiry; examines epistemological, ontological, axiological and theoretical assumptions and their consequences for qualitative inquiry in the human sciences; interrogates core concepts of qualitative inquiry such as fieldwork, data, validity and representation.""Conceptions of data and analysis in qualitative methodologies; focus on applied topics in qualitative data analysis, such as narrative analysis, ethnographic analysis, life history analysis, postmodern analyses, discourse analysis, arts-based analytical strategies, constructing data; combination format of reading and discussion seminars and classroom workshops focusing on individual research projects (not for thesis or dissertation)."Guided reading and/or study on special topics of an advanced nature."Introduction to the Russian language, grammar and syntax. Practice in the four basic skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) within the context of Russian culture.""Introduction to the Russian language, grammar and syntax. Practice in the four basic skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) within the context of Russian culture.""Supervised intensive instruction in Russian language and culture; formal class instruction at level appropriate to students? training, augmented by practical living experiences. Consult with department regarding equivalence with RUS 101 and 102. Acceptable for LAS General Education Requirement credit in the II group."Thorough review of grammar and growth of vocabulary. Selected readings. Continued use of the four basic skills.Thorough review of grammar and growth of vocabulary. Selected readings. Continued use of the four basic skills."Supervised intensive instruction in Russian language and culture; formal class instruction at level appropriate to students? training, augmented by practical living experiences. Consult with department regarding equivalence with RUS 201 and 202. Acceptable for LAS General Education Requirement credit in the II group.""Thorough study of the Russian language, with emphasis on strengthening proficiency in writing, speaking, reading, and listening. Increased focus on syntax and word formation."Communication in business and professional contexts in Russian-speaking countries. Development of effective communication strategies and project management in the workplace. Cultural contexts of business and professional practice.Selected readings in Russian literature and culture. Emphasis on techniques of reading and analysis of literary and cultural texts."Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women writers, cinema, or contemporary theory. Readings, discussions, and papers in English.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women writers, cinema, or contemporary theory. Readings, discussions, and papers in English.""A survey of social, political, economic, and cultural topics relevant to contemporary Russia.  Readings, discussions and papers in English.""Analysis and interpretation of cinema in Russia and the Soviet Union. Topics vary according to faculty interest. Film directors, genres, movements, historical survey, aesthetics, and cinematography. Readings, discussions and papers in English.""Supervised instruction in language and culture of Russia; formal class instruction at level appropriate to student's training, augmented by practical living experience.""Designed to meet the needs of students who seek work in areas other than those in which courses are offered, or who desire to integrate a study of literature or language with special problems in major fields.   No more than 9 credits of Rus 490 may be counted toward graduation."Work experience using Russian language skills in the public or private sector combined with academic work under faculty supervision. Available only to minors.   No more than 3 credits may be applied to the minor.Critical analysis of current practice and case studies in strategic management with an emphasis on integrative decision making.  Strategy formulation and implementation will be investigated in the context of complex business environments."Introduction to a broad variety of information systems (IS) topics, including current and emerging developments in information technology (IT), IT strategy in the context of corporate strategy, and IS planning and development of enterprise architectures.  Cases, reading, and discussions highlight the techniques and tactics used by managers to cope with strategic issues within an increasingly technical and data-driven competitive environment.""Integration of the business functions concerned with the marketing and movement of goods along the supply chain with the primary goal of creating value for the ultimate customer. Coordination of marketing, production, and logistics activities within the firm and with outside suppliers and customers in the supply chain.""Understanding human behavior in organizations, and the nature of organizations from a managerial perspective.  Special emphasis on how individual differences, such as perceptions, personality, and motivation, influence individual and group behavior in organizations and on how behavior can be influenced by job design, leadership, groups, and the structure of organizations.""Survey of fundamental topics in accounting and finance.  Financial statement reporting and analysis for agriculture firms, corporate governance issues related to financial reporting, (e.g., Sarbanes-Oxley). Basic tools and techniques used in financial management, including stock and bond valuation. How to assess and use capital budgeting methods to evaluate proposed firm investments.""Cultural, financial, economic, political, legal/regulatory environments shaping an organization's international business strategy.  Topics include entry (and repatriation) of people, firms, goods, services, and capital. Special attention to the institutions of seed regulation and policy. Ethical issues facing managers operating in an international context."A study of the basic principles and methods in the genetic improvement of crop plants. Methods used in manipulating genomes through the use of biotechnology. Methods of cultivar development.  Quantitative procedures for describing response to selection. Analysis of the relationship of reproductive characters and growth characteristics to response to selection."The components of seed quality and how they are assessed in the laboratory, including traits derived from modern biotechnology. The impact of new technologies on seed quality testing. Variety maintenance procedures and breeder seed. Variety identification: phenotype and grow-out trials, isozyme testing, and DNA marker testing. Procedures for evaluating varieties. The variance tests appropriate for fixed effects analysis of variance. Statistical inference and stratification for yield trials. Use of strip plot testing.""An analysis of the defining characteristics of the seed industry and introduction to the Master in Seed Technology and Business curriculum. The tasks of crop improvement and seed production will be analytically related to basic management functions and classifications of management activities that are used in the study of business administration. Management tasks and roles will be analyzed in related to the public policy issues that shape the seed industry, including ethical and economical approaches to biotechnology, intellectual property, and corporate responsibility.""Quantitative Methods for analyzing and interpreting agronomic and business information for the seed industry. Principles of experimental design and hypothesis testing, regression, correlation and graphical representation of data. Use of spreadsheets for manipulating, analyzing and presenting data."The technical operations which may be carried out on a seed lot from harvest until it is ready for marketing and use. The opportunities for quality improvement and the risks of deterioration which are present during that time. Analysis of the costs of and benefits of operations. Evaluation of equipment based on benefits to the customer and producer. Interpretation of the role of the conditioning plant and store as a focal points within the overall operations of a seed company."Brief introduction to plant physiology.  Physiological aspects of seed development, maturation, longevity, dormancy and germination.  Links between physiology and seed quality.""Survey of crop production; including management of soil fertility, planting dates, populations, weed control, and insect control. Analysis of the principles of seed multiplication and the key practices which are used to ensure high quality in the products. Field inspection procedures and production aspects that differ from other crop production. Foundation seed production. Analysis of the typical organization of field production tasks. Resources and capabilities required. Survey of differences in seed production strategies  between crops and impact of  differences on management of seed production.""Munkvold. Occurrence and management of diseases during seed production, harvest, conditioning, storage, and planting. Emphasis     on epidemiology, disease management in the field, seed treatment, effects of conditioning on seed health, and seed health testing.   Credit may not be obtained for both Pl P/STB 592 and Pl P 594.""Advanced survey of the organization, staff capabilities and management characteristics typical in seed production and crop improvement in seed enterprises. Analysis of the use of quality information in the management of seed operations and sales. Process management applications for seed.  Production planning for existing capacity.  Analysis of the manager's tasks in the annual cycle and how the tasks of these managers relate to the general categories of business management roles. Difference in management strategies used with different situations and groups of employees.""A written report based on research, library readings, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee."Survey of public service and administration in agriculture. Exploration of career tracks and career planning. Recommended during first semester of freshman year or as soon as possible after transfer into the department."Orientation to sociology. A familiarization with University and LAS College requirements and procedures. Occupational tracks and career options open to sociology; introduction to career planning. Recommended during first semester of freshman year, or as soon as possible after transfer into the department.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Social interaction and group behavior with emphasis on the scientific study of contemporary U.S. society, including issues relating to socialization, inequality, and changing rural and urban communities. Analysis of relationships among the institutions of family, religion, political participation, work, and leisure.""Social interaction and group behavior with emphasis on the scientific study of contemporary U.S. society, including issues relating to socialization, inequality, and changing rural and urban communities. Analysis of relationships among the institutions of family, religion, political participation, work, and leisure.""Analysis of intimate relationships among couples using a sociological perspective. Attention is given to singlehood; dating and courtship; sexuality; mate selection, cohabitation, and marriage. Relationship quality, communication, conflict and dissolution of these types of relationship will also be explored.""An introduction to the key global issues in sustainability. Focuses on interconnected roles of energy, materials, human resources, economics, and technology in building and maintaining sustainable systems. Applications discussed will include challenges in both the developed and developing world and will examine the role of technology in a resource-constrained world.   Cannot be used for technical elective credit in any engineering department.""Introduction to the causes and consequences of social and economic change affecting rural people and places. Uses a sociological perspective to examine social structures, social change, and social relationships within rural society. Topics include community, population change, inequality, rural economy, structure of agriculture, social and environmental impacts of resource extraction.""Sociological concepts, theories and methods to analyze the causes and consequences of social problems.  Social problems discussed may include crime, substance abuse, income inequalities, discrimination, poverty, race relations, health care, family issues, and the environment.  How American culture and values shape societal conditions, public discourse and policy.""An examination of delinquency that focuses on the relationship between youth as victims and as offenders, social and etiological features of delinquency, the role of the criminal justice system, delinquents' rights, and traditional and alternative ways of dealing with juvenile crime.""Introduction to the principal research methods used in sociology, including survey research, interviewing, content analysis, experiments, ethnographies, focus groups, historical analysis, and analysis of secondary data.  Instruction on sampling and the principles of validity and reliability underlying quantitative and qualitative methods.  Training in data analysis using statistical software packages.""Examination of human behavior in a social environment with emphasis on development of the self, interpersonal relations, attitudes, and small groups.""Analysis of evolving theory and research of community as an ideal type, an ecological system, a political economy, and an interactional field; examination of the impact of economic, cultural, social and political infrastructures on community power structures and change processes in a global era.""The impacts of agricultural changes on farm families, rural communities, and consumers.  Past, present, and future trends in family farms and their social implications.""How the biological fact of sex is transformed into a system of gender stratification. The demographics and social positions of women and men in the family, education, media, politics, and the economy. Theories of the social-psychological and sociological bases for behavior and attitudes of women and men. The relationship between gender, class, and race.""Examination of socially constructed and idealized images of manhood, the nature of social hierarchies and relations constructed on the basis of imagery, ideologies, and norms of masculinity. Theories on gender (sociological, psychological, and biological). Particular attention given to theory and research on gender variations among men by race, class, ethnicity, sexual orientation, physical ability and age.""Analysis of ethnic and race relations, particularly in America; emphasis on the sociology and psychology of race and ethnic relations.""Social stratification and processes resulting in social and economic inequalities; implications of status, class, and poverty for people of different races, ethnicities, and gender.""Examination of the social, historical, economic and political experience of varied Latino ethnic groups in the U.S. - primarily focusing on Mexican, Puerto Ricans, and Cubans.""The relationship between politics and society with emphasis on American society. Discussion of theories of inequality, power, social movements, elites, ruling classes, democracy, and capitalism.""Theory and research on the etiology of types of social deviance; issues relating to crime, antisocial behavior and social policies designed to control deviant behavior."The nature of crime and criminology; the concept of crime; statistics and theories of criminality; major forms of crime; official responses to crime and control of crime."Human population growth and structure; impact on food, environment, and resources; gender issues; trends of births, deaths, and migration; projecting future population; population policies and laws; comparison of the United States with other societies throughout the world.""Trends in hunger, poverty, resource use and development.  Assessment of theories, policies, and programs to promote sustainable livelihoods, resource management, and development at local and national levels. Examine solutions through institutional efforts and grassroots social movements.""Introduction and overview of law enforcement in the United States.  Theory and research on police history, function, and organization; constitutional issues of policing; and critical topics, such as community policing, officer discretion and decision-making, corruption, use of force, and racial profiling.  The course illustrates the interconnections between communities, police organizations, citizens, and criminal offenders.""Introduction and overview of corrections in the United States.  Theory and research on probation, parole, intermediate sanctions, prison, inmate society, inmate behavior and misconduct, capital punishment, recidivism, correctional treatment, rehabilitation, and offender reintegration into society."Identify major ethical issues and dilemmas in the conduct of agricultural and agribusiness management and decision making. Discuss and debate proper ethical behavior in these issues and situations and the relationship between business and personal ethical behavior."The influence of religion in society, both as a conservator of values and as a force for social change.""Inequalities (gender, race, class) related to jobs, occupations, firms, and industries. Satisfactions, rewards, alienation, discrimination, and other topics of importance to workers are examined.""A survey of small group theory and research from an interdisciplinary, social psychological perspective.""Environment-society relations; social construction of nature and the environment; social and environmental impacts of resource extraction, production, and consumption; environmental inequality; environmental mobilization and movements; U.S. and international examples."Both historical and modern social theories as applied to understanding and researching the social world."Introduction and overview of white-collar crime as a form of deviance.  Theory and research on occupational, corporate, and organizational offending; prevalence, costs, and consequences of white-collar crime; predictors and correlates of white-collar crime; and political, business, and public policy responses to white-collar crime.""Social change and development in developing countries; international interdependence; causes and consequences of persistent problems in agriculture, city growth, employment, gender equality, basic needs; local and worldwide efforts to foster social change and international development.""Transition from student to professional. Career development procedures including self-assessment, short- and long-term goals, strategies for the job search, development of contacts and sources, resumes and interviews. Enrollment preferred in first semester as senior.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Examination of public responses to complex and controversial innovations, such as environmentalism, feminism, stem-cell research, same-sex marriage, large-scale hog lots, and others.  Strategies for gaining adoption/rejection of controversial innovations. Applications to topics in agriculture, development, business, and marketing.   Credit for only Soc 415 or 515 may be applied toward graduation.""Study of the criminal and juvenile justice systems and social control processes. Supervised placement in a police department, prosecutor's office, court, probation and parole department, penitentiary, juvenile correctional institution, community-based rehabilitation program, or related agency. Assessed service learning component.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.  No more than a total of 9 credits of 460 can be counted toward graduation. No credits in Soc 460 may be used to satisfy minimum sociology requirements for sociology majors.""Project-focused engagement in community issues and initiatives.  A broad range of strategies will be addressed, including popular education, applied research, network analysis and mapping, policy focused work, action research, curriculum development, community organizing, and organizational development.""Thematic or topical issues and studies dealing with the sociology of police, judiciary, institutional and community-based corrections, gender/ethnicity and crime/delinquency, criminal and delinquent gangs, and crime and delinquency prevention.""The contemporary family in developing, industrial, and post-industrial societies. Effects of modernization, cultural change, and family policies on family dynamics, structures, and functions."Students in the College of Agriculture must be of junior or senior classification and may use no more than 6 credits of Soc 490 toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation. Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may count no more than 9 credits of 490 toward graduation.Students in the College of Agriculture must be of junior or senior classification and may use no more than 6 credits of Soc 490 toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation. Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may count no more than 9 credits of 490 toward graduation.Students in the College of Agriculture must be of junior or senior classification and may use no more than 6 credits of Soc 490 toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation. Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may count no more than 9 credits of 490 toward graduation.Students in the College of Agriculture must be of junior or senior classification and may use no more than 6 credits of Soc 490 toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation. Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may count no more than 9 credits of 490 toward graduation.Students in the College of Agriculture must be of junior or senior classification and may use no more than 6 credits of Soc 490 toward the total of 128 credits required for graduation. Students in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences may count no more than 9 credits of 490 toward graduation."The origins of the canonical works of sociology in the mid-Industrial Revolution period including Karl Marx, Max Weber, Emile Durkheim and others.""Experiential, interdisciplinary examination of Midwestern agricultural and food systems, emphasizing field visits, with some classroom activities. Focus on understanding multiple elements, perspectives (agronomic, economic, ecological, social, etc), and scales of operation.""Covers the philosophy and the techniques of research methods in sociology and other social sciences, including the ethics and politics of social science, validity issues, conceptualization and operationalization, sampling strategies, appropriate research designs for different questions, survey construction, and various data collection and analysis techniques.""Applied techniques of multivariate analysis includng cluster analysis, principal components and factor analysis, multivariate analysis of variance and covariance binomial and multinomial regression, multi-level random coefficient models, and spatial regression. Conceptual and mathematical grounding for nonstatisticians. Instruction in Mplus and SAS.""Applied qualitative research methods in sociology. Design and implementation of a course-based research project including data collection, analysis, and presentation of results. Qualitative data gathering techniques using observational, historical, in-depth interviewing or content analysis approaches. Laboratory emphasis on completion of data gathering, analysis, and report writing.""Examination of cognitive, symbolic interaction, exchange, role-reference group, and dramaturgical approaches. Assessment of contemporary issues in social psychology.""Analysis of racial and ethnic inequality in the United States and the world; focus on the implications of the changing world social and economic order for differences in racial and ethnic groups relative to wealth, status, and power; a critical examination of majority-group domination of minority groups in various societies.""Analysis of racial and ethnic inequality in the United States and the world; focus on the implications of the changing world social and economic order for differences in racial and ethnic groups relative to wealth, status, and power; a critical examination of majority-group domination of minority groups in various societies.""Analysis of racial and ethnic inequality in the United States and the world; focus on the implications of the changing world social and economic order for differences in racial and ethnic groups relative to wealth, status, and power; a critical examination of majority-group domination of minority groups in various societies.""Emphasis on different models or frames of reference used in community analysis. Theoretical and methodological tools, current views of community problems, and explanation of social and cultural change are presented for each model.""Critical examination of the causes and consequences of social stratification and inequality; classical theories, contemporary frameworks, and recent empirical studies; international stratification patterns."Project-focused community practice using diverse approaches and perspectives."Contemporary theories of social change, modernization, dependency, and development are critically examined; methodological issues identified; supporting research explored; applicability of theoretical models, concepts, and strategies to current national and international needs are evaluated."Seminar in social change and development."Social organization of food and fiber production, processing, and distribution systems. Sociological comparison of conventional and alternative production systems; gender roles in agriculture and food systems; local, national and global food systems; perspectives on food and agricultural research and policy."Social causes and social consequences of environmental problems. Interrelationship between social inequality and environmental inequality. Social construction and social experience of the environment. Contemporary developments in the social theory of the environment. International and domestic implications."Social construction of economic activity in non-industrial and industrial societies with special attention on variations of industrial societies (capitalism and socialism), economic globalization, and economic development. Interaction of economic systems with human values, ideology, organizations, work and individual welfare.""Theory and research regarding causes of and reactions to deviant behavior. Mental illness, homicide, family violence, and property crime are among the types of deviant behavior considered."Discussion of current research and theory in crime and delinquency; topics include the purpose and role of law in social life; emerging theoretical directions in criminology; recent work on specific forms of criminality; controversies in the criminal justice system."Course presents a general overview of the field of family sociology. Topics to be covered include demographic trends, family theory and empirical research, as well as current debates in the discipline.""Introduction to the department, current graduate student policies at department and university levels, departmental administrative procedures. Required of graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Provides a review of modern sociological thought, issues, and controversies as they affect current research and discourse in the discipline.""Historical, biophysical, socioeconomic, and ethical dimensions of agricultural sustainability. Strategies for evaluating existing and emerging agricultural systems in terms of the core concepts of sustainability and their theoretical contexts.""Specification, identification, and interpretation of structural equation models. Techniques include structural or  path models, measurement or confirmatory factor models, structural models with latent variables, and multi-level structural models. Conceptual and mathematical grounding for non-statisticians. Instruction in AMOS, MPLUS, and SAS.""Introduction to the procedures, policies, and resources of Iowa State University and the department of Computer Science and Electrical and Computer Engineering. Information on engineering and computer-based professions.""Overview of the nature and scope of the software engineering profession. Relationship of coursework to careers. Departmental rules, student services operations, degree requirements, program of study planning, career options, and student organizations.""Introduction to software engineering and computer programming. Systematic thinking process for problem solving in the context of software engineering. Group problem solving. Solving software engineering problems and presenting solutions through computer programs, written documents and oral presentations. Introduction to principles of programming, software design, and extensive practice in design, writing, running, debugging, and reasoning about programs."First professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."Basic theory of grammars, parsing.  Language paradigms. State transition and table-based software design.   Review of principles of object orientation, object oriented analysis using UML.   Frameworks and APIs. User interface architecture, evaluation of user interface. Design of windows, menus, and commands. Introduction to formal specification and model-based software design. Introduction to domain-specific software engineering.""Process-based software development. Capability Maturity Model (CMM). Project planning, cost estimation, and scheduling. Project management tools. Factors influencing productivity and success. Productivity metrics. Analysis of options and risks. Version control and configuration management. Inspections and reviews. Managing the testing process. Software quality metrics. Modern software engineering techniques and practices.""Modeling and design of software at the architectural level. Architectural styles. Basics of model-driven architecture. Object-oriented design and analysis. Iterative development and unified process. Design patterns. Design by contract. Component based design. Product families. Measurement theory and appropriate use of metrics in design. Designing for qualities such as performance, safety, security, reliability, reusability, etc. Analysis and evaluation of software architectures. Introduction to architecture definition languages. Basics of software evolution, reengineering, and reverse engineering. Case studies. Introduction to distributed system software.""Study of concepts in programming languages and major programming paradigms, especially functional programming. Special emphasis on design tradeoffs that enable students to make sound choices of programming languages for a given software development task.  Programming projects."Summer professional work period.One semester maximum per academic year professional work period.Second professional work period in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work."The requirements engineering process including identification of stakeholders requirements elicitation techniques such as interviews and prototyping, analysis fundamentals, requirements specification, and validation. Use of Models: State-oriented, Function-oriented, and Object-oriented. Documentation for Software Requirements. Informal, semi-formal, and formal representations. Structural, informational, and behavioral requirements. Non-functional requirements. Use of requirements repositories to manage and track requirements through the life cycle. Case studies, software projects, written reports, and oral presentations will be required.""A study of formal techniques for model-based specification and verification of software systems. Topics include logics, formalisms, graph theory, numerical computations, algorithms and tools for automatic analysis of systems. Graduate credit requires in-Ìâå_depth study of concepts.""Practical importance of software evolution and maintenance, systematic defect analysis and debugging techniques, tracing and understanding large software, impact analysis, program migration and transformation, refactoring, tools for software evolution and maintenance, experimental studies and quantitative measurements of software evolution. Written reports and oral presentation.""Comprehensive study of software testing, principles, methodologies, management strategies and techniques. Test models, test design techniques (black box and white box testing techniques), test adequacy criteria,integration, regression, system testing methods, and software testing tools.""Software tools for managing and manipulating large volumes of data, external memory processing, large scale parallelism, and stream processing, data interchange formats. Weekly programming labs that involve the use of a parallel computing cluster."Investigation of an approved topic."Preparing for entry to the workplace. Selected professional topics. Use of technical writing skills in developing project plan and design report; project poster. First of two-semester team-oriented, project design and implementation experience."Second semester of a team design project experience. Emphasis on the successful implementation and demonstration of the design completed in S E 491 and the evaluation of project results. Technical writing of final project report; oral presentation of project achievements.Portfolio assessment for Software Engineers. Guidelines and Advice to improve software engineering portfolios and to better use portfolios as a tool to enhance career opportunities.Third and subsequent professional work periods in the cooperative education program. Students must register for this course before commencing work.For students who require additional review at the first year (101-102) level. Course components include a compact review of 101 and the essential elements of 102. Course completed with a passing grade fulfills the LAS foreign language requirement. Not recommended for students who wish to continue language at the second year (201-202) level without completing 102.A communicative approach to grammar and vocabulary within the context of Hispanic culture. For students whose native language is not Spanish.Continuation of Spanish 101. A communicative approach to grammar and vocabulary within the context of Hispanic culture. For students whose native language is not Spanish."Supervised instruction in Spanish and Hispanic culture; formal class instruction at level appropriate to student's training, augmented by practical living experience. Taught in Spanish. Consult the department regarding equivalency with SPAN 101 or 102."Intensive review of basic grammar and conversation. For students whose native language is not Spanish. Practice in oral and written communication. Development of fluency with idiomatic expressions. Selected readings on culture and literature.Continuation of Spanish 201. Intensive review of basic grammar. Practice in oral and written communication. Development of fluency with idiomatic expressions. Selected readings on culture and literature. For students whose native language is not Spanish."Supervised instruction in Spanish and Hispanic culture; formal class instruction at level appropriate to student's training, augmented by practical living experience. Taught in Spanish. Consult the department regarding equivalency with SPAN 201 or 202."Bridge course between 200- and 300-level Spanish courses that focuses on application of advanced grammatical concepts within the context of Hispanic culture. Accelerated review of SPAN 201 and SPAN 202 designed for students who want to continue at the 300 level.  Taught in Spanish for students whose native language is not Spanish.Review and application of grammar concepts in the development of writing skills within the context of Hispanic culture. Taught in Spanish. For students whose native language is not Spanish.Intensive oral practice and improvement of oral proficiency. Application of specific grammatical concepts for development of conversational skills within the context of Hispanic culture. Taught in Spanish.Intensive oral practice and improvement of oral proficiency. Application of specific grammatical concepts for development of conversational skills within the context of Hispanic culture. Taught in Spanish. For students whose native language is not Spanish.Intensive oral practice and improvement of oral proficiency. Application of specific grammatical concepts for development of conversational skills within the context of Hispanic culture. Taught in Spanish.Introduction to professional communication within a cultural context. Grammar review as needed. Individual projects will focus on special interests. Taught in Spanish."Critical reading of Hispanic literary and cultural texts. Presentation of techniques and terminology of literary criticism. Study of basic genres such as: narrative, poetry, drama, essay. Taught in Spanish.""A survey of the social, political, religious, and cultural history of Spain. Taught in Spanish.""A survey of the social, political, religious, and cultural history of Spanish America. Taught in Spanish.""A survey of social, political, economic, and cultural topics relevant to contemporary Spain. Taught in Spanish.""A survey of social, political, economic, and cultural topics relevant to contemporary Latin America. Taught in Spanish."Survey of major currents and figures in Spanish and Latin American art and/or film. Taught in Spanish."Introduction to Spanish literature from the earliest times through the Golden Age; techniques of literary criticism. Lectures, discussion, and analysis of individual selections in Spanish. Taught in Spanish.""Introduction to Spanish literature from the eighteenth century to the present; techniques of literary criticism. Lectures, discussion, and analysis of individual selections in Spanish. Taught in Spanish.""Introduction to Latin American literature from the earliest times to circa 1900; techniques of literary criticism. Lectures, discussion, and analysis of individual selections in Spanish. Taught in Spanish.""Introduction to Latin American literature from the twentieth century to the present; techniques of literary criticism. Lectures, discussion, and analysis of individual selections in Spanish. Taught in Spanish.""Introduction to the theory, methods, techniques, and problems of translation. Consideration of material from business, literature, and the social sciences. Taught in Spanish.""An introductory study of the articulation, classification, distribution, and regional variations of the sounds of the Spanish language. Taught in Spanish.""Introduction to the theory, methods, techniques, and problems of consecutive and simultaneous interpretation.  Consideration of material from business, agriculture, law, design, medicine, literature, advertisement, and sports. Taught in Spanish.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women writers, cinema, or contemporary theory. Readings, discussions, and papers in English. May not be counted as a prerequisite.""Topics vary according to faculty interest.  Knowledge and understanding of major cultural, ethical, sociopolitical and economic issues directly related to agriculture and agribusiness in Latin America, Spain, and/or Equatorial Guinea. Readings, discussions, and papers in English. May not be counted as a prerequisite.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women writers, cinema, or contemporary theory. Readings, discussions, and papers in English. May not be counted as a prerequisite.""Supervised instruction in Spanish and Hispanic culture; formal class instruction at level appropriate to students' training, enhanced by practical living experience.""Advanced study of Spanish grammar and syntax. Students' writing of compositions incorporates an advanced understanding of grammar, syntax, and principles of organization of thought and ideas. Taught in Spanish."Discussion and analysis of selected topics in Spanish literature and culture from the Middle Ages to the Present. Taught in Spanish.Discussion and analysis of selected works of Cervantes within the social and cultural context of the Golden Age. Taught in Spanish.Discussion and analysis of selected topics in Latin American literature and culture from Pre-Colonial times to the Present. Taught in Spanish.Linguistic study of the major differences between the Spanish and English grammatical systems and their applications in the translation of Spanish to English. Taught in Spanish."Intensive study of the phonology, morphosyntax and lexicon of the Hispanic dialects of Spain and Latin America in their historical context. Taught in Spanish.""Designed to meet the needs of students in areas other than those in which courses are offered, or who desire to integrate a study of literature or language with special problems in major fields.   No more than 6 credits in Span 490 may be counted toward graduation.""Work experience using Spanish language skills in the public or private sector, combined with academic work under faculty supervision.   Up to 3 credits may apply toward the major. Available only to majors and minors.""Advanced study of Spanish grammar and syntax. Students' writing of compositions incorporates an advanced understanding of grammar, syntax, and principles of organization of thought and ideas. Taught in Spanish."Survey of major currents and figures in Spanish and Latin American art and/or film.Discussion and analysis of selected topics in Spanish literature and culture from the Middle Ages to the Present. Taught in Spanish.Discussion and analysis of selected works of Cervantes within the social and cultural context of the Golden Age. Taught in Spanish.Discussion and analysis of selected topics in Latin American literature and culture from Pre-Colonial times to the Present. Taught in Spanish."Introduction to the theory, methods, techniques, and problems of consecutive and simultaneous interpretation.  Consideration of material from business, agriculture, law, design, medicine, literature, advertisement, and sports. Taught in Spanish.""An overview of students with diverse learning needs, including legal foundations.  Emphasis on early identification; educational programming, services and strategies; and preparation for community living in a heterogeneous society.""Educational services and programming for students with mild/moderate disabilities examined from an historical perspective. Current trends, issues, impact of federal and state laws, and identification procedures. Characteristics of students with mild/moderate disabilities."Evidence-based teaching strategies and instructional accommodations for inclusive education. Emphasis on managing challenging behavior."Examination and application of strategies for determining special educational needs, planning and evaluating instructional programs, and monitoring student progress.""Formal and informal diagnostic instruments. Determination of special education needs. Planning, adaptation, and formative evaluation of instructional programs for students with mild/moderate disabilities."Federal and state law. Service delivery models. Issues related to providing instruction that meets the needs of diverse learners in inclusive primary settings."Overview of characteristics and needs of exceptional children/youth and appropriate service delivery options.  Legal foundations for special education. Emphasis on co-teaching models, differentiated instruction, accommodations for instruction and assessment, and collaboration among professionals and parents."Reservation required.Evidence-based instructional strategies/techniques in academic areas and materials for individual instruction and classroom management for elementary students with mild/moderate disabilities.Evidence-based instructional strategies and techniques in academic areas that support the learning of students with diverse learning needs. Emphasis on accommodations and alternative teaching strategies to meet individual student needs.Observation and involvement with students with mild/moderate disabilities in school settings. Concurrent enrollment in SP ED 460. 1/2 day of time needed. Clinical Experience Level 3.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Application of evidence-based instructional strategies/techniques in academic and behavioral areas with students who have mild/moderate disabilities.  Discussion of professional practices."Collaborative skills used in education of students with mild/moderate disabilities.  Includes collaboration between general and special education teachers, parents, paraeducators, and other education professionals and agencies.""Overview of characteristics and needs of exceptional children/youth and appropriate service delivery options.  Legal foundations for special education. Emphasis on co-teaching models, differentiated instruction, accommodations for instruction and assessment, and collaboration among professionals and parents. Students complete a literature review on a topic related to students with exceptionalities and their content area.""Historical and legal foundations for special education. Characteristics, prevalence, and etiology of mild/moderate disabilities. Historical and contemporary models of programming for students with disabilities.""Study of theory, characteristics, and special education service delivery models to students with moderate/severe behavior/learning disabilities in the public schools and residential settings.""Formal and informal methods of assessment for identification/eligibility, IEP development, and progress monitoring. Formative evaluation of academic and behavioral skills, including curriculum-based measurement and functional behavioral assessment."Critical review of recent research in education and related behavioral sciences as applied to education of students with disabilities. Examination of multiple research methodologies."Evidence-based instructional methods for meeting the academic and behavioral needs of students with mild/moderate disabilities. Includes methods, strategies, and behavior management techniques appropriate for students with mild or moderate disabilities."Current research on evidence-based interventions designed to improve the behavior and social skills of students with moderate/severe behavior disorders. Particular emphasis on positive behavioral supports and behavior change strategies."Current research on evidence-based interventions designed to improve the academic performance of students with moderate/severe learning disabilities. Particular emphasis on methods for improving reading, written expression, and mathematics, as well as performance in content-area instruction.""Instructional strategies for enhancing the fluency, vocabulary and comprehension of struggling adolescent readers.  Attention to content-area reading materials and strategies.""Examination of the academic, personal, social, employability, and daily living skills needed for a satisfactory adult life. Exploration of curricula, programs, and services to meet these needs."Emphasis on positive behavioral supports and understanding behavior and its context through a functional behavioral approach. Design and development of carefully planned behavioral intervention programs for groups and individual students in general and special education settings."Models of consultation. Characteristics and methods to promote effective collaboration with families, paraprofessionals, other school personnel, and representatives of other agencies. Includes specific attention to IEP development as a collaborative process.""Explore role of the educational consultant in different settings (state department, area education agency, school district, private). Examine roles in relationship to models (mental health, collaborative, organization).""Instructional methods and assessment techniques for secondary students struggling to learn mathematics.  Particular emphasis on current research, practices, and trends in mathematics interventions for at-risk students and students with disabilities.""Overview of support systems (education, juvenile justice, mental health, communities) that serve students with special education needs.  Working with and supporting families."Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Supervised on-the-job field experience in special areas.Selected topics in special education. Analysis of current special education research. Evaluation of impact upon the profession. Implications for additional research."Theory, principles, and competency development in comprehensive, therapeutic, critical, consumer, and appreciative listening. The   impact of listening in relationships and partnerships."Theory and practice of basic speech communication principles applied to public speaking. Practice in the preparation and delivery of extemporaneous speeches.Survey of great speeches examined within their political and cultural contexts. Analysis of the rhetorical strategies of diverse speakers with an emphasis on texts from social movements in the United States.Participation in intramural and intercollegiate debate and other forensic events."Analysis of how information and entertainment forms persuade and manipulate audiences. Study of several forms that may include newspapers, speeches, television, film, advertising, fiction, and magazines. Special attention to verbal and visual devices.""The study of symbolic processes and how meaning is conveyed in words, sentences, and utterances; discussion of modern theories of meaning; and an exploration of relationships among language, thought and action.""Theory, principles, and competency development in the creation of coherent, articulate business and professional oral   presentations."Principles of communicating information: training in classroom and workshop-oriented communication activities; use of recording   for analysis of presentations."Practice in preparing and presenting arguments and debates; emphasis on critical thinking and ethical and logical duties of the   advocate; analysis, evidence, reasoning, attack, defense, research, case construction, and judging."Examines how understanding and enactment of gender identity is shaped by communication. Verbal and nonverbal   communication across various contexts including personal relationships and the media.  Explores discourse of social movements aiming to transform cultural definitions of gender."Speech communication in the legal system inside and outside the trial process: interviewing and counseling, negotiating and   bargaining, voir dire, opening statements, examination of witnesses, closing arguments, judge's instructions, jury behavior, and   appellate advocacy.""Examination of persuasive theories, strategies and research in persuasion. Emphasis on application and analysis; logical, emotional, and ethical proofs.""Ideas about the relationship between rhetoric and society in contemporary and historical contexts. An exploration of classical and contemporary rhetorical theories in relation to selected topics that may include politics, gender, race, ethics, education, science, or technology."Seminar on topics central to the field of speech communication.Development of rhetorical theory and practice from Corax to modern times. Application of principles of criticism to current public speaking practices.Relationship between public discourse and social change; selected speakers and discourse as linked with political or historical   events.Backgrounds of candidates for state and national elections; selected speeches and issues; persuasive strategies and techniques of individual speakers.Only one independent study enrollment is permitted within the department per semester."Problems, methods, and materials related to directing speech activities in secondary schools.""Problems, methods, and materials related to teaching speech, theatre, and media in secondary schools."Students synthesize relevant theory and research about contemporary communication practice.Applications should be submitted in the term prior to the term in which the internship is desired. Supervised application of speech communication in professional settings.Seminar on topics central to the field of speech communication."Required of all new SP CM 212 teaching assistants. Introduction to the teaching of public speaking. Support and supervision of teaching assistants of SP CM 212. Discussion of lesson planning, teaching methods, development of speaking assignments, and evaluation of student speaking.""Rhetorical theory from the classical period of ancient Greece and Rome through the Middle Ages to the early Renaissance; attention to its relation to the nature of knowledge, communication, practice, and pedagogy.""Rhetorical theory from the early modern period (Bacon, Descartes, and Locke) to the present; attention to its relation to the nature of knowledge, communication practice, and pedagogy."Extended practice in close textual analysis of various kinds of rhetorical artifacts. Attention to important theoretical concepts used in rhetorical analysis and to historical controversies over the scope and function of rhetorical analysis.Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition.Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition.Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition.Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition.Seminar on topics central to the fields of rhetoric and professional communication or composition."Opportunities, challenges, and the scope of the curriculum in statistics. For students planning or considering a career in this area.""Statistical concepts in modern society; descriptive statistics and graphical displays of data; the normal distribution; data collection (sampling and designing experiments); elementary probability; elements of statistical inference; estimation and hypothesis testing; linear regression and correlation; contingency tables.   Credit for only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: STAT 101, STAT 104, STAT 105, STAT 201, or STAT 226.""Statistical concepts and their use in science; collecting, organizing and drawing conclusions from data; elementary probability; binomial and normal distributions; regression; estimation and hypothesis testing. For students in the agricultural and biological sciences.   Credit for only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: STAT 101, STAT 104, STAT 105, STAT 201, or STAT 226.""Statistical concepts with emphasis on engineering applications. Data collection; descriptive statistics; probability distributions and their properties; elements of statistical inference; regression; statistical quality control charts; use of statistical software; team project involving data collection, description and analysis.   Credit for only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: STAT 101, STAT 104, STAT 105, STAT 201, or STAT 226. Credit for both STAT 105 and STAT 305 may not be applied for graduation.""Statistical thinking and applications of statistical concepts and methods in modern society. Display and summary of categorical and numerical data. Exploring relationships between variables, association, correlation, and regression. Observational studies and experiments. Probability concepts, random variables, discrete and continuous distributions. Elements of statistical inference; estimation and hypothesis testing.   Credit for only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: STAT 101, STAT 104, STAT 105, STAT 201, or STAT 226.""Obtaining, presenting, and organizing statistical data; measures of location and dispersion; the Normal distribution; sampling and sampling distributions; elements of statistical inference; estimation and confidence intervals; hypothesis testing; inference for simple linear regression analysis; use of computers to visualize and analyze data.   Credit for only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: STAT 101, STAT 104, STAT 105, STAT 201, or STAT 226."Emphasis on engineering applications. Basic probability; random variables and probability distributions; joint and sampling distributions. Descriptive statistics; confidence intervals; hypothesis testing; simple linear regression; multiple linear regression; one way analysis of variance; use of statistical software."Statistical concepts and methods used in the analysis of data. Statistical models. Analysis of single sample, two sample and paired sample data. Simple and multiple linear regression including polynomial regression. Analysis of residuals. Regression diagnostics. Model building. Regression with indicator variables.   Credit for only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: STAT 301, STAT 326, or STAT 401""Statistics for engineering problem solving. Principles of engineering data collection; descriptive statistics; elementary probability distributions; principles of experimentation; confidence intervals and significance tests; one-, two-, and multi-sample studies; regression analysis; use of statistical software; team project involving engineering experimentation and data analysis.   Credit for both Stat 105 and 305 may not be applied for graduation.""Introduction to probability with applications to electrical engineering. Sets and events, probability space, conditional probability, total probability and Bayes' rule. Discrete and continuous random variables, cumulative distribution function, probability mass and density functions, expectation, moments, moment generating functions, multiple random variables, functions of random variables. Elements of statistics, hypothesis testing, confidence intervals, least squares. Introduction to random processes.""Multiple regression analysis; regression diagnostics; model building; applications in analysis of variance and time series; random variables; distributions; conditional probability; statistical process control methods; use of computers to visualize and analyze data.   Credit for only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: STAT 301, STAT 326 or STAT 401."Topics from probability and statistics applicable to computer science. Basic probability; Random variables and their distributions; Stochastic processes including Markov chains; Queuing models; Basic statistical inference; Introduction to regression."Communicating quantitative information using visual displays; visualizing data; interactive and dynamic data displays; evaluating current examples in the media; color, perception, and representation in graphs; interpreting data displays."Probability; distribution functions and their properties; classical discrete and continuous distribution functions; multivariate probability distributions and their properties; moment generating functions; simulation of random variables and use of the R statistical package.   Credit for both STAT 341 and STAT 447 may not be applied toward graduation.Transformations of random variables; sampling distributions; confidence intervals and hypothesis testing; theory of estimation and hypothesis tests; linear model theory; use of the R statistical package for simulation and data analysis.Statistical methods for process improvement. Simple quality assurance principles and tools.  Measurement system precision and accuracy assessment. Control charts. Process capability assessment. Experimental design and analysis for process improvement. Significant external project in process improvement.Off-campus work periods for undergraduate students in a field of statistics."Graduate students without an equivalent course should contact the department. Methods of analyzing and interpreting experimental and survey data. Statistical concepts and models; estimation; hypothesis tests with continuous and discrete data; simple and multiple linear regression and correlation; introduction to analysis of variance and blocking.   Credit for only one of the following courses may be applied toward graduation: STAT 301, STAT 326, or STAT 401.""The role of statistics in research and the principles of experimental design. Experimental units, randomization, replication, blocking, subdividing and repeatedly measuring experimental units; factorial treatment designs and confounding; extensions of the analysis of variance to cover general crossed and nested classifications and models that include both classificatory and continuous factors. Determining sample size.""Lorenz. Applications of generalized linear regression models to social science data. Assumptions of regression; diagnostics and transformations; analysis of variance and covariance; path analysis; logistic, multinomial and Poisson regression.""The analysis of spatial data; geostatistical methods, mapping and spatial prediction; methods for areal data; models and methods for spatial point processes. Emphasis on application and practical use of spatial statistical analysis. Use of R and R packages for spatial data analysis.""Techniques for displaying and analyzing multivariate data including plotting high-dimensional data using interactive graphics, comparing group mean vectors using Hotelling's T2, multivariate analysis of variance, reducing variable dimension with principal components, grouping/classifying observations with cluster analysis and discriminant analysis. Imputation of missing multivariate observations."Descriptive statistics; data collection through experimentation and sampling; univariate statistical inference; contingency tables; design of experiments and ANOVA; simple linear regression; logistic regression; multiple linear regression; statistics pedagogy."Advanced statistical methods for modeling and analyzing data. Taught as separate 1 cr. sections, each of 5 weeks. Three sections taught in one semester. Areas covered: Logistic and Poisson regression; Structural equation modeling; Smoothing and nonparametric regression; Nonparametric and distribution free methods; Bootstrapping and randomization tests; Visualization of high dimensional data; Analysis of species composition data; Missing data and measurement error.""Introduction to high-throughput technologies for gene expression studies (especially RNA-sequencing technology):  the role of blocking, randomization, and biological and technical replication in the design of gene expression experiments; normalization methods; methods for identifying differentially expressed genes including mixed linear model analysis, generalized linear model analysis, generalized linear mixed model analysis, quasi-likelihood methods, empirical Bayes analysis, and resampling based approaches; procedures for controlling false discovery rate for multiple testing; clustering and classification problems for gene expression data; testing gene categories; emphasis on practical use of methods.""Concepts of sample surveys and the survey process; methods of designing sample surveys, including: simple random, stratified, and multistage sampling designs; methods of analyzing sample surveys including ratio, regression, domain estimation and nonresponse.""Statistical methods for research involving computers; exploratory data analysis; selected topics from analysis of designed experiments - analysis of variance, hypothesis testing, interaction among variables; linear regression, logistic regression, Poisson regression; parameter estimation, prediction, confidence regions, dimension reduction techniques, model diagnostics and sensitivity analysis; Markov chains and processes; simulation techniques and bootstrap methods; applications to computer science, bioinformatics, computer engineering - programs, models and systems as objects of empirical study; communicating results of empirical studies. Statistical software: R.""Probabilistic models in biological, engineering and the physical sciences.  Markov chains; Poisson, birth-and-death, renewal, branching and queing processes; applications to bioinformatics and other quantitative problems.""Probability models and prior distributions; updating priors through the likelihood function.  Computational and simulation-based methods for deriving posterior distributions and for estimating parameters.  Basic statistical and hierarchical models.  Model adequacy and posterior predictive checks.  Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods and introduction to WinBUGS or similar software.  Emphasis on applications and examples from the social, biological and physical sciences.""Primarily for graduate students not majoring in statistics. Emphasis on aspects of the theory   underlying statistical methods. Probability, probability density and mass functions, distribution   functions, moment generating functions, sampling distributions, point and interval estimation, maximum   likelihood and likelihood ratio tests, linear model theory, conditional expectation and minimum mean   square error estimation, introduction to posterior distributions and Bayesian analysis, use of   simulation to verify and extend theory.   Credit for both STAT 341 and STAT 447 may not be applied toward graduation.""Meeker. Methods for analyzing data collected over time; review of multiple regression analysis. Elementary forecasting methods: moving averages and exponential smoothing. Autoregressive-moving average (Box-Jenkins) models: identification, estimation, diagnostic checking, and forecasting. Transfer function models and intervention analysis.  Introduction to multivariate time series methods.""Statistical methods for the analysis of categorical data: graphical summaries, estimation and inference for proportions, sample size determination, chi-square tests, measures of relative risk, odds and association, analysis of paired data and measures of agreement, logistic regression models, log-linear models.""Structure, content and programming aspects of the Statistical Analysis System (SAS) software package. Advanced techniques in the use of SAS for data analysis including statistical graphics, regression diagnostics, and complex analysis of   variance models. The SAS graphical interfaces Enterprise Guide and Enterprise Miner will be introduced.""Modern statistical computing. Data management; spread sheets, verifying data accuracy, transferring data between software packages. Data and graphical analysis with statistical software packages. Algorithmic programming concepts and applications. Simulation. Software reliability."No more than 9 credits in Stat 490 may be counted toward graduation.No more than 9 credits in Stat 490 may be counted toward graduation."Graduate students without an equivalent course should consult the department. Statistical thinking applied to industrial processes. Assessing, monitoring and improving processes using statistical methods. Analytic/enumerative studies; graphical displays of data; fundamentals of six sigma; process monitoring; control charts; capability analysis.""Statistical design and analysis of industrial experiments. Concepts of control, randomization and replication. Simple and multiple regression; factorial and fractional factorial experiments; application of ideas of six sigma; reliability; analysis of lifetime data."Analysis of data from designed experiments and observational studies. Randomization-based inference; inference on group means; nonparametric bootstrap; pairing/blocking and other uses of restricted randomization. Use of linear models to analyze data; least squares estimation; estimability; sampling distributions of estimators; general linear tests; inference for parameters and contrasts. Model assessment and diagnostics; remedial measures; alternative approaches based on ranks."Statistical methods for analyzing and displaying multivariate data; the multivariate normal distribution; inference in multivariate populations, simultaneous analysis of multiple responses, multivariate analysis of variance; summarizing high dimensional data with principal components, factor analysis, canonical correlations, classification methods, clustering, multidimensional scaling; introduction to basic nonparametric multivariate methods.  Statistical software: SAS or R.""A Statistics-MS-level introduction to Modern Multivariate Statistical Learning. Theory-based methods for modern data mining and machine learning, inference and prediction. Variance-bias trade-offs and choice of predictors; linear methods of prediction; basis expansions; smoothing, regularization, kernel smoothing methods; neural networks and radial basis function networks; bootstrapping, model averaging, and stacking; linear and quadratic methods of classification; support vector machines; trees and random forests; boosting; prototype methods; unsupervised learning including clustering, principal components, and multi-dimensional scaling; kernel mechanics. Substantial use of R packages implementing these methods.""Approaches to finding the unexpected in data; exploratory data analysis; pattern recognition; dimension reduction; supervised and unsupervised classification; interactive and dynamic graphical methods; computer-intensive statistical techniques for large or high dimensional data and visual inference. Emphasis is on problem solving, topical problems, and learning how so-called black-box methods actually work.""Statistical methods and models for environmental applications.  Emphasis on environmental toxicology.  Analysis of data with below detection-limit values.  Dose-response curve modeling, including overdispersion and estimation of safe doses. Trend analysis; analysis of autocorrelated data.  Equivalence testing."The analysis of spatial data; geostatistical methods and spatial prediction; discrete index random fields and Markkov random field models; models for spatial point processes."Model selection and collinearity in linear regression. Likelihood analysis for general models and models with non-normal random components; linear model results in the context of likelihood; linear mixed models and their application; estimation, inference, and prediction. Computational issues in iterative algorithms; expectation- maximization algorithm and its use in mixed models. Case studies of applications including problem formulation, exploratory analysis, model development, estimation and inference, and model assessment.""Basic techniques of experimental design developed in the context of the general linear model;   completely randomized, randomized complete block, and Latin Square designs; factorial experiments,   confounding, fractional replication; split-plot and incomplete block designs."Analysis techniques for locating optimum and near-optimum operating conditions: standard experimental designs for first- and second-order response surface models; design performance criteria; use of data transformations; mixture experiments; optimization for multiple-response problems. Requires use of statistical software with matrix functions."Construction of nonlinear statistical models; random and systematic model components, additive error nonlinear regression with constant and non-constant error variances, generalized linear models, transform both sides models. Iterative algorithms for estimation and asymptotic inference. Basic random parameter models, beta-binomial and gamma-Poisson mixtures. Requires use of instructor-supplied and student-written R functions.""Introduction to high-throughput technologies for gene expression studies (especially RNA-sequencing technology):  the role of blocking, randomization, and biological and technical replication in the design of gene expression experiments; normalization methods; methods for identifying differentially expressed genes including mixed linear model analysis, generalized linear model analysis, generalized linear mixed model analysis, quasi-likelihood methods, empirical Bayes analysis, and resampling based approaches; procedures for controlling false discovery rate for multiple testing; clustering and classification problems for gene expression data; testing gene categories; emphasis on current research topics for statistical analysis of high dimensional gene expression data.""Nonlinear regression; generalized least squares; asymptotic inference. Generalized linear models; exponential dispersion families; maximum likelihood and inference. Designing Monte Carlo studies; bootstrap; cross-validation. Fundamentals of Bayesian analysis; data models, priors and posteriors; posterior prediction; credible intervals; Bayes Factors; types of priors; simulation of posteriors; introduction to hierarchical models and Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods.""Practical aspects and basic theory of design and estimation in sample surveys for finite populations. Simple random, systematic, stratified, cluster multistage and unequal-probability sampling. Horvitz-Thompson estimation of totals and functions of totals: means, proportions, regression coefficients. Linearization technique for variance estimation. Model-assisted ratio and regression estimation. Two-phase sampling and sampling on two occasions. Non-response effects. Imputation.""Advanced topics in survey sampling and methodology: clustering and stratification in practice, adjustments and imputation for missing data, variance estimation in complex surveys, methods of panel and/or longitudinal surveys, procedures to increase response rates, and computing. Examples are taken from large, well-known surveys in various subject areas. Prior exposure to mathematical statistics, probability, and at least one course in survey sampling theory is assumed.""Statistical methods and theory applicable to problems of industrial process monitoring and improvement. Statistical issues in industrial measurement; Shewhart, CUSUM, and other control charts; feedback control; process characterization studies; estimation of product and process characteristics; acceptance sampling, continuous sampling and sequential sampling; economic and decision theoretic arguments in industrial statistics.""Probabilistic modeling and inference in engineering reliability; lifetime models, product limit estimator, probability plotting, maximum likelihood estimation for censored data, Bayesian methods in reliability, system reliability models, competing risk analysis, acceleration models and analysis of accelerated test data; analysis of recurrence data; planning studies to obtain reliability data.""Statistical methods for non-standard problems, illustrated using questions and data from ecological field studies.  Estimation of abundance and survival from mark-recapture studies, deterministic and stochastic matrix models of population trends, integral projection models, and hierarchical modeling, especially of population dynamics. Additional topics vary based on student interest.""Statistical models and methods for genetics covering models of population processes: selection, mutation, migration, population structure, and linkage disequilibrium, and inference techniques: genetic mapping, linkage analysis, and quantitative trait analysis. Applications include genetic map construction, gene mapping, genome-wide association studies (GWAS), inference about population structure, phylogenetic tree construction, and forensic and paternity identification.""Sample spaces, basic probability results, conditional probability. Random variables, univariate distributions, moment generating functions. Joint distributions, conditional distributions and independence, correlation and covariance. Probability laws and transformations. Introduction to the multivariate normal distribution. Sampling distributions, normal theory, sums and order statistics. Convergence concepts, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem and delta method. Basics of stochastic simulation.""Point estimation including method of moments, maximum likelihood and Bayes. Properties of point estimators, mean squared error, unbiasedness, consistency, loss functions. Large sample properties of maximum likelihood estimators. Exponential families, sufficiency, completeness, ancilarity, Basu's theorem. Hypothesis tests, Neyman-Pearson lemma, uniformly most powerful tests, likelihood ratio tests, Bayes tests. Interval estimation, inverting tests, pivotal quantities. Nonparametric theory, bootstrap.""Specification of probability models; subjective, conjugate, and noninformative prior distributions; hierarchical models; analytical and computational techniques for obtaining posterior distributions; model checking, model selection, diagnostics; comparison of Bayesian and traditional methods."Overview of parametric versus nonparametric methods of inference; introduction to rank-based tests and/or nonparametric smoothing methods for estimating density and regression functions; smoothing parameter selection; applications to semiparametric models and goodness-of-fit tests of a parametric model."Theory and methods for analyzing functional data, which are high dimensional data resulted from discrete, error-contaminated measurements on smooth curves and images. The topics include kernel and spline smoothing, basis expansion, semiparametric regression, functional analysis of variance, covariance modeling and estimation, functional principal component analysis, functional generalization linear models, joint modeling, dimension reduction, classification and clustering functional data.""Concepts of trend and dependence in time series data; stationarity   and basic model structures for dealing with temporal dependence;   moving average and autoregressive error structures; analysis in   the time domain and the frequency domain; parameter estimation,   prediction and forecasting; identification of appropriate model   structure for actual data and model assessment techniques. Possible   extended topics include dynamic models and linear filters.""Markov chains on discrete spaces in discrete and continuous time (random walks, Poisson   processes, birth and death processes) and their long-term behavior. Optional topics may include branching processes, renewal theory, introduction to Brownian motion.""Statistical methods for analyzing simple random samples when outcomes are counts or proportions; measures of association and relative risk, chi-squared tests, loglinear models, logistic regression and other generalized linear models, tree-based methods. Extensions to longitudinal studies and complex designs, models with fixed and random effects. Use of statistical software: SAS, S-Plus or R.""Statistical methods commonly used in epidemiology and human and animal health studies.  Overview of cohort studies, case-control studies and randomized clinical trials.  topics include inference procedures for disease risk factors, analysis of time-to-event and survival data, analysis of longitudinal studies of disease progression and health status, approaches to handling missing data, and meta-analysis.  Examples will come from recent studies of physical and mental health, nutrition and disease progression in human and animal populations. Use of statistical software: SAS or R."Advanced sequence models.  Basic methods in molecular phylogeny.  Hidden Markov models.  Genome annotation.  DNA and protein motifs. Introduction to gene expression analysis."Algorithmic and statistical approaches in computational functional genomics and systems biology. Elements of experiment design. Analysis of high throughput gene expression, proteomics, and other datasets obtained using system-wide measurements. Topological analysis, module discovery, and comparative analysis of gene and protein networks. Modeling, analysis, simulation and inference of transcriptional regulatory modules and networks, protein-protein interaction networks, metabolic networks, cells and systems: Dynamic systems, Boolean, and probabilistic models. Multi-scale, multi-granularity models. Ontology-driven, network based, and probabilistic approaches to information integration.""An introduction to the logic of programming, numerical algorithms, and graphics. The R statistical programming  environment will be used to demonstrate how data can be stored, manipulated, plotted,  and analyzed using both built-in functions and user extensions. Concepts  of modularization, looping, vectorization, conditional execution, and  function construction will be emphasized.""Introduction to scientific computing for statistics using tools and concepts in R: programming tools, modern programming methodologies, modularization, design of statistical algorithms. Introduction to C programming for efficiency; interfacing R with C. Building statistical libraries. Use of algorithms in modern subroutine packages, optimization and integration. Implementation of simulation methods; inversion of probability integral transform, rejection sampling, importance sampling. Monte Carlo integration."Off-campus work periods for graduate students in a field of statistics."Methods of constructing complex models including adding parameters to existing structures, incorporating stochastic processes and latent variables. Use of modified likelihood functions; quasi-likelihoods; profiles; composite likelihoods. Asymptotic normality as a basis of inference; Godambe information. Sample reuse; block bootstrap; resampling with dependence. Simulation for model assessment. Issues in Bayesian analysis.""Statistical theory and methods for modern data mining and machine learning, inference, and prediction.  Variance-bias trade-offs and choice of predictors;  linear methods of prediction; basis expansions; smoothing, regularization, and reproducing kernel  Hilbert spaces;  kernel smoothing methods; neural networks and radial basis function networks; bootstrapping, model averaging, and stacking; linear and quadratic methods of classification; support vector machines; trees and random forests; boosting; prototype methods; unsupervised learning including clustering, principal components, and multi-dimensional scaling; kernel mechanics.""Consideration of advanced topics in spatial statistics,   including areas of current research.  Topics may include construction of   nonstationary covariance structures including intrinsic random functions,   examination of edge effects, general formulation of Markov random field   models, spatial subsampling, use of pseudo-likelihood and empirical   likelihood concepts in spatial analysis, the applicability of asymptotic   frameworks for inference, and a discussion of appropriate measures for   point processes.""Matrix preliminaries, estimability, theory of least squares and of best linear unbiased estimation, analysis of variance and covariance, distribution of quadratic forms, extension of theory to mixed and random models, inference for variance components.""General theory of factorial experiments.  Design optimality criteria, approximate design and general   equivalence theory, computational approaches to constructing optimal designs for linear models, and   extensions to nonlinear models. Advanced topics of current interest in the design of experiments,   including one or more of: distance based design criteria and construction of spatial process models,   screening design strategies for high-dimensional problems, and design problems associated with   computational experiments.""Complex hierarchical and multilevel models, dynamic linear and generalized linear models, spatial models.  Bayesian nonparametric methods. Specialized Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms and practical approaches to increasing mixing and speed convergence.  Summarizing posterior distributions, and issues in inference.  Model assessment, model selection, and model averaging.""Advanced topics of current interest in the design of surveys and analysis of survey data, including: asymptotic theory for design and model-based estimators, use of auxiliary information in estimation, variance estimation techniques, small area estimation, non-response modeling and imputation.""Sequences and set theory; Lebesgue measure, measurable functions. Absolute continuity of functions, integrability and the fundamental theorem of Lebesgue integration. General measure spaces, probability measure, extension theorem and construction of Lebesgue-Stieljes measures on Euclidean spaces. Measurable transformations and random variables, induced measures and probability distributions. General integration and expectation, Lp-spaces and integral inequalities. Uniform integrability and absolute continuity of measures. Probability densities and the Radon-Nikodym theorem. Product spaces and Fubini-Tonelli theorems.""Probability spaces and random variables. Kolmogorov's consistency theorem. Independence, Borel-Cantelli lemmas and Kolmogorov's 0 - 1 Law. Comparing types of convergence for random variables. Sums of independent random variables, empirical distributions, weak and strong laws of large numbers. Convergence in distribution and its characterizations, tightness, characteristic functions, central limit theorems and Lindeberg-Feller conditions. Conditional probability and expectation. Discrete parameter martingales and their properties and applications.""Sufficiency and related concepts, completeness, exponential families and statistical information. Elements of decision theory, decision rules, invariance and Bayes rule. Maximum likelihood and asymptotic inference. Generalized estimating equations and estimating functions, M-estimation, U-statistics. Likelihood ratio tests, simple and composite hypotheses, multiple testing. Bayesian inference. Nonparametric inference, bootstrap, empirical likelihood, and tests for nonparametric models.""Exchangeability, parametric models, consistency and asymptotic normality of posterior distributions, posterior robustness, selection of priors using formal rules, improper priors and posterior propriety, Bayes factors, model selection, MCMC theory, irreducibility, Harris recurrence, regeneration, minorization, drift, ergodicity, limit theorems, techniques for speeding up convergence of certain MCMC algorithms."Weak convergence. Random walks and Brownian motion. Martingales. Stochastic integration and Ito's Formula. Stochastic differential   equations and applications."Multivariate normal distribution, estimation of the mean vector and the covariance matrix, multiple and partial correlation, Hotelling's T2 statistic, Wishart distribution, multivariate regression, principle components, discriminant analysis, high dimensional data analysis, latent variables."Seminar topics change with each offering."Stationary and nonstationary time series models, including   ARMA, ARCH, and GARCH.  Covariance and spectral representation   of time series. Fourier and periodogram analyses. Predictions.   CLT for mixing processes. Estimation and distribution theory.   Long range dependence.""Normal approximations to likelihoods. The delta-method and propagation of errors. Topics in the use of the E-M algorithm including; its use in the exponential family, computation of standard errors, acceleration. Resampling methods: brief theory and application of the jackknife and the bootstrap. Randomization tests. Stochastic simulation: Markov Chain, Monte Carlo, Gibbs' sampling, Hastings-Metropolis algorithms, critical slowing-down and remedies, auxiliary variables, simulated tempering, reversible-jump MCMC and multi-grid methods.""Various supply chain activities and integration of supply chain management with supply and demand, both within and between firms. Exposure to a wide range of supply chain management terminology, analytical tools, and theories related to four key elements of supply chain management:  purchasing, operations, distribution, and integration. Specific topics include strategic sourcing, supply management, demand forecasting, resource planning, inventory management, process management, logistics, location analysis, process integration, and performance measurement.""Equips students to support team activities in the general project management environment and better manage their careers. Practical experience using project management techniques and tools. Course topics include project initiation and execution, risk assessment, estimating and contracts, planning, human factors, and standard methods.""Advanced treatment of manufacturing planning and control procedures. Master production scheduling, material requirements planning, enterprise resource planning, capacity planning, shop floor control, just-in-time, and competitive analyses of modern manufacturing systems.""The design, analysis, and management of production processes to improve performance. Performance measures and their relationships; process design and evaluation; and managerial levers for improving and controlling process performance.""In-depth analysis of current issues, problems, and systems in operations management with emphasis on new theoretical and methodological developments. Topics may include in different semesters, supply chain management, productivity and quality improvement, management of technology and innovation, information technology in operations management, quick response manufacturing, and service operations management.""Internal and inter-organizational information systems necessary for a supply chain to achieve competitive advantage. Topics include: design, development, implementation, and maintenance of supply chain information systems; enterprise resource planning; advanced planning and scheduling, manufacturing execution systems; and the interface between manufacturing planning and control processes, logistics processes, and the information system."Examination of the role of enterprise resource planning systems (ERP) in the supply chain. Hands-on experience with a major software application in use by many corporations to manage and improve the efficiency of their supply chains and operations. Students will develop a more process-centric perspective about how a supply chain operates and how ERP enables and supports such operations."Supply chain planning and control is the process which synchronizes demand with manufacturing and distribution. This course will cover sales and operations planning with emphasis on forecasting, master scheduling, materials requirements planning, inventory management and demand planning. Linking business plans and information systems for integration and distribution channels are also covered.""Technical tools and skills required for problem solving and decision making in logistics and operations management. Transportation and network planning, inventory decision making, facility location planning, vehicle routing, scheduling, and production planning. Quantitative tools include linear and integer programming, non-linear programming, and simulation. Emphasis on the use of PC-based spreadsheet programs.""Economic, operating, and service characteristics of the various modes of transportation, with a special emphasis on freight transportation. Factors that influence transport demand, costs, market structures, carrier pricing, and carrier operating and service characteristics and their influence on other supply chain costs and supply chain performance.""Analysis of transport users' requirements. Carrier management problems involving ownership and mergers, routes, competition, labor, and other decision areas."Logistics systems and legal framework for the international movement of goods. Operational characteristics of providers of exporting and importing services. The effects of government trade policies on global logistics."Demand planning process which synchronizes demand with manufacturing and distribution. Addresses linking business plans and demand forecasts both horizontally and vertically within the organization and collaboratively among supply chain partners. Forecasting, customer relationship management, sales and operations planning, customer service, distribution channels, e-fulfillment, and information systems requirements.""Sourcing strategies, concepts, tools and dynamics in the context of the integrated supply chain. Make or buy decision, supplier evaluation and selection, global sourcing, the total cost of ownership, contracts and legal terms, negotiation, purchasing ethics, and information systems requirements.""Capstone course in supply chain management. Integrating and applying the theories, concepts, and methods covered in the prerequisite courses through the use of readings, case studies, projects, and industry speakers.""Introduction to supply chain management including aspects of operations, logistics and global supply chain strategy development. Topic areas include lean manufacturing and value stream mapping; supplier development and measurement; sustainable supply chain operations; process measurement, management and improvement; supply chain risk and uncertainty; visibility and integration in the supply chain; and inventory control.""The application of decision models for supply chain management. Topics include business applications of decision theory, inventory theory, business forecasting, optimization models, transportation and network models, routing problems, and project management.""An integrated analysis of planning and control systems for supply chains. Master production scheduling, material requirements planning, enterprise resource planning, capacity planning, shop floor control, competitive analyses of modern supply chain systems, and implementation of information technologies related to these topics.""Analysis, management, and improvement of the business processes used to produce and deliver products and services that satisfy customer needs.  Process attributes that managers can control to influence the key operational performance measures of throughput time, inventory, cost, quality, and flexibility are discussed.  Topics such as theory of constraints, lean production, and six sigma are included.""Positions logistics vis-a-vis supply chain management (SCM). Presents different perspectives on SCM vs. logistics. Describes primary logistics functions: transportation, warehousing, facility location, customer service, order processing, inventory management and packaging. Benefits of and obstacles to the integration of these functions.""Analysis of contemporary issues and strategies in transportation management and policy. Emphasis on evaluation of the impacts of transportation policies, new technologies, and strategic carrier and shipper management practices on the freight transportation industry and logistics systems.""Mechanics, procedures and tools used in purchasing. Recruiting, selecting, developing and managing supply chain partners in order to achieve competitive advantage via superior supply chain management. Factors and information needs for making supply management decisions.""Synchronizes demand  with manufacturing and distribution. Emphasis on the strategic advantages of linking business plans and demand forecasts, both vertically within the organization and collaboratively among supply chain partners."For students who wish to do individual research in a particular area of supply chain management."An overview of the development of supply chain management (SCM) theory, including review of seminal articles in logistics, operations, and purchasing management and theories from allied disciplines (e.g., economics, marketing, sociology, strategic management). Analysis of trends in SCM research topics and methodologies.  Identification of emerging and future areas for research and theory development.""Review of research literature on supply chain strategy, including the impact of technology, global economic and social factors, and intra- and inter-organizational integration on supply chain strategy formation.  The role of SCM in overall corporate strategy and the impact of SCM on firm performance will also be addressed."Review of classic purchasing theories.  Discussion of contemporary supply management strategy; the role of supply management and its relationship with other functional areas; its impact on logistics and transportation issues; management of supply uncertainties."Integration of network, economic, and systems theory in the design, management, and control of logistics systems in the context of integrated supply chain management.  Functional areas addressed include transportation, inventory order fulfillment, distribution, and warehousing.  Facility location analysis will also be covered.""Review of the research literature on methods of organizing, planning, controlling, and improving manufacturing systems to achieve the desired performance objectives related to cost, quality, speed, and flexibility. The relationship between the performance of the manufacturing system and the performance of the supply chain system will also be discussed."Preparation of a research manuscript to be submitted to a peer-reviewed academic journal. Students will work with a faculty mentor on a research project."Preparation of a second research manuscript to be submitted to a peer-reviewed academic journal. Although students work under the supervision of a faculty mentor, the students will take independent responsibility for the research project."Research."Experiential, interdisciplinary examination of Midwestern agricultural and food systems, emphasizing field visits, with some classroom activities. Focus on understanding multiple elements, perspectives (agronomic, economic, ecological, social, etc), and scales of operation.""Methods to maintain productivity and minimize the negative ecological effects of agricultural systems by understanding nutrient cycles, managing manure and crop residue, and utilizing multispecies interactions. Crop and livestock production within landscapes and watersheds is also considered. Course includes a significant field component, with student teams analyzing Iowa farms.""Durable, least-toxic strategies for managing weeds, pathogens, and insect pests, with emphasis on underlying ecological processes."Project-focused engagement in food and farming systems using tools and perspectives drawn from multiple disciplines. Includes a field component."Concepts of sustainable land use, agroecological dynamics, and component interactions of agroforestry systems. Agroforestry systems in temperate and tropical regions. Design and evaluation techniques for agroforestry systems. Ecological, socioeconomic and political aspects of agroforestry."Understanding of the historical origins and ecological theories underpinning the practices involved in organic agriculture. Interdisciplinary examination of crop and livestock production and socio-economic processes and policies in organic agriculture from researcher and producer perspectives.For students wishing to conduct in-depth study of a particular topic in sustainable agriculture.Pre-enrollment contract required. For MS students pursuing the non-thesis degree option. Final product is a creative component.Weekly seminar for graduate students in the Sustainable Agriculture program."Historical, biophysical, socioeconomic, and ethical dimensions of agricultural sustainability. Strategies for evaluating existing and emerging agricultural systems in terms of the core concepts of sustainability and their theoretical contexts."MS and PhD thesis and dissertation research."Addressing sustainable design at multiple scales of constructed and natural systems and artifacts, this studio engages multidisciplinary graduate students in a team-oriented, project-based learning environment.  Faculty-directed projects will include theoretical investigations and applications of an interdisciplinary design process through brief readings and discussions.""This advanced studio provides a community-based context for an interdisciplinary design team to work on a variety of faculty-directed projects including funded, basic, and applied research.  Coursework addresses sustainable design at multiple scales, engaging both systems and artifacts.  Field trips.""Study and discuss practices of sustainable design and design research.  Investigate responsibilities, roles, technologies and methods for studying and advancing the art and science of designing sustainable environments.""A graduate student-led seminar designed to foster the knowledge and skills to support innovation, entrepreneurship, and leadership in the field of sustainable design.  Invitation of outside speakers.""Introduction to the broad frameworks and tools for implementing sustainability among a variety of environments, industries, and enterprises.  Investigates the role and opportunity for sustainable design strategies.""This seminar provides students from multiple disciplines with a grounding in designers' interactions with clients, consumers, communities, cultures, and biospheres.  Through a review of literature and the production of new case studies in sustainable design, students discover and represent conditions in which products of design operate across scales, markets, social conditions, geographic domains, academic disciplines, and zones of professional responsibility.""An introduction to the key global issues in sustainability. Focuses on interconnected roles of energy, materials, human resources, economics, and technology in building and maintaining sustainable systems. Applications discussed will include challenges in both the developed and developing world and will examine the role of technology in a resource-constrained world.   Cannot be used for technical elective credit in any engineering department."An interdisciplinary study of the international significance of technology and of the societal and human issues attending its development and adoption."Issues in the agricultural and food systems of the developed and developing world. Emphasis on economic, social, historical, ethical and environmental contexts. Causes and consequences of overnutrition/undernutrition, poverty, hunger and access/distribution. Explorations of current issues and ideas for the future. Team projects.""Issues in the agricultural and food systems of the developed and developing world. Emphasis on economic, social, historical, ethical and environmental contexts. Causes and consequences of overnutrition/undernutrition, poverty, hunger and access/distribution. Explorations of current issues and ideas for the future. Team projects.""Moral and other philosophical problems related to developments in technology.  Topics may include conditions under which technological innovations contribute to human emancipation, relationship of technology and democracy, utility and limits of technical rationality, and problems of ensuring that benefits of technological advance are communally shared. Topics discussed with reference to such issues as contemporary developments in microelectronics, technology transfer to the Third World, etc.""Examination of historical and current communication technologies, including how they shape and are shaped by the cultural and social practices into which they are introduced."Seminar in social change and development."Personal, organizational, and social implications of the use of communication technologies. Includes theories and empirical research across the continuum of perspectives, from techno-utopianism through an anti-technology stance."Individual study of topics concerning global and local implications of technological change."Team-oriented introduction to agricultural systems technology and industrial technology. Internships, careers, competencies, academic success strategies, industry visits, transition to academic life.""Laboratory-based, team-oriented experiences in a spectrum of topics common to the practice of technology. Report writing, internships, competencies, industry visits.""Solving technology problems and presenting solutions through data analysis and technical report writing. Problem solving cycle, unit conversion, unit factor method, SI units, significant digits, graphing, curve fitting and computer programming. Use of modern hardware and software tools for applied data-driven problem solving.""Use of  parametric solid modeling software to model, and document, parts and assemblies. Includes national and international standards for documentation, design projects, and teamwork. Free-hand sketching techniques will be covered.""8 week course. Professionalism in the context of the engineering/technical workplace. Development and demonstration of key workplace competencies: teamwork, initiative, communication, and engineering/technical knowledge. Resumes; Cover Letters; Behavioral Based Interviewing; Industry Speakers; Preparation for internships experiences.""Introduction to problem solving related to fundamental agricultural and/or industrial technology systems and mathematical tools needed for data analysis. Basic laws of energy, force, and mass applied to technology systems such as: mechanical power transmission; heating, ventilation and air conditioning; electrical circuits. Introduction to engineering economics: using the time value of money to make economic decisions.""Advanced computer-aided-design topics incorporating 3D design and documentation used in manufacturing settings. Topics include: geometric dimensioning and tolerancing, weldments, sheet metal parts, advanced visualization, feature based design of parts and assemblies.""A study of selected materials and related processes used in manufacturing. Lecture and laboratory activities focus on materials, properties, and processes. This includes plastics and metals.""Basic foundations of injury causation and prevention in home, motor vehicle, public, and work environments.""Introduction to the fundamental concepts of TQM - Deming style of management, statistical studies to understand the behavior of products, processes, or services, and how to define and document processes and customer focus.  Introduction to continuous improvement tools and methods -  emphasis on team work and problem solving skills."Principles and management for grain quality preservation. Quality measurement. Drying and storage. Fans and airflow through grain. Handling methods.Hands-on experiences in the principles and management for grain quality preservation. Quality measurement. Drying and storage. Fans and airflow through grain. Handling methods. System planning. Industry tour."Introduction to engineering and conservation principles applied to the planning of erosion control systems, water control structures, water quality management, and drainage and irrigation  systems.""Converting biorenewable resources into bioenergy and biobased products. Biorenewable concepts as they relate to drivers of change, feedstock production, processes, products, co-products, economics, and transportation/logistics.""Confined animal feeding operations. Environmental controls for animal production. Response of animals to the environment. Heat and moisture balance in animal housing. Ventilation, water, feed handling, air pollution, odor and waste management systems.""Selection, sizing, and operational principles of tractors and machinery systems. Cost analysis and computer techniques applied to planning and management of agricultural machine systems. Principles, operation, and application of agricultural machinery."Geographic information systems (GIS) and global positioning systems (GPS). Hardware systems for precision farming emphasized. Autosteering and automatic implement control systems. Collection and management of yield data. Sampling strategies for precision farming. Introduction to building fertilizer prescriptions and recommendations. Economic benefits of precision farming systems."Theory and construction of tractor engines, mechanical power trains and hydraulic systems. Introduction to traction, chassis mechanics, and hydraulic power.""Fundamental fluid power principles. Fluid properties. Function and performance of components such as pumps, valves, actuators, hydrostatic transmission. Analysis of fluid power circuits and systems. Introduction to electrohydraulics. Course includes lab using fluid power trainers.""NC programming operations for CNC mills and lathes. Transfer of parts descriptions into detailed process plans, tool selection, and NC codes. Computer assisted CAD/CAM NC programming for 2D/3D machining and machining of student programmed NC code in lab.""Basic electricity. Electrical safety, wiring, 3-phase service, controls, and motors for agricultural and industrial applications. Planning building lighting and electrical systems. Electronics to sense, monitor, and control mechanical processes."Identifies safety and health risks in industrial work environments. Focus on how managers and supervisors meet their responsibilities for providing a safe workplace for their employees. Includes the identification and remediation of workplace hazards.Introduction to occupational safety and health administration and management. Focus on development and management of safety programs and obtaining employee involvement in occupational safety programs."A review of the common legal issues facing safety practitioners in the workplace.  Includes OSHA, EPA and DOT regulations; workers' compensation, as well as common liability issues.""An overview of the current problems and technology in the fields of fire protection and fire prevention, with emphasis on industrial needs, focusing on the individual with industrial safety responsibilities."Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.Offered as demand warrants. Web-based instruction.A supervised work experience in an approved learning setting with application to technology practices and principles. Reporting during work experience and self and employer evaluation required.  Minimum GPA requirement.Written reports and reflection on work experience.   A maximum of 4 credits of TSM 399 maybe be used toward the total credits required for graduation."Identification and definition of a current technological problem in agricultural or industrial systems. Formation of project teams, application of technology curriculum content, and use of team communication and management as applied to problem solving in technology.""Continued team and project development, communications, and responsibilities. Development of alternate solutions using tools and knowledge from technology curriculum, creativity, critical analysis, and planning techniques. Selection of promising solutions to technology problem identified in TSM 415 for development and analysis. Presentation of project through oral presentations, written reports, and/or working prototypes.""Introduction to lean tools and techniques that reduce costs and improve business performance: JIT, VSM, SMED, Kaizen, Standard Work, Cycle Time Reduction, Takt Time, A3, etc.  Emphasis on lean thinking and competency development through application: simulations, case studies, industry guests and mentors, teamwork and industry-related lean projects."Application of standard analytic and computer based techniques of solving problems related to force and moments. The properties of materials and how to select appropriate materials for a particular design is reviewed."Fundamental principles and practices in designing, evaluating, and organizing new or existing facilities. Emphasis on CAD-based facility design, production flow analysis, activity relationship analysis, materials handling, office layout, supporting services design, and facility cost analysis.""Theory and applications of automation systems. Emphasizes features, capabilities, design and programming skills of Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) based industrial control systems. Introduction to industrial robots and sensors.""A qualitative and quantitative introduction to health effects of chemical, biological, and physical hazards in a workplace.""Introduction to equipment, methods, and strategies to measure, evaluate, control, and research hazards and risk in the workplaces.""Risk analysis and management focuses on developing a risk oriented pattern of thinking that is appropriate for today's complex world. The tools that will be gained in this course will be helpful in recognizing, understanding, and analyzing hazards and risks in modern complex systems."A maximum of 4 credits of TSM 490 may be used toward the total credits required for graduation.A maximum of 4 credits of TSM 490 may be used toward the total credits required for graduation.A maximum of 4 credits of TSM 490 may be used toward the total credits required for graduation.A maximum of 4 credits of TSM 490 may be used toward the total credits required for graduation.A maximum of 4 credits of TSM 490 may be used toward the total credits required for graduation.A maximum of 4 credits of TSM 490 may be used toward the total credits required for graduation.Offered as demand warrants.Offered as demand warrants.Offered as demand warrants.Offered as demand warrants.Offered as demand warrants."Preparation for, or follow-up of, study abroad experience (496). For preparation, course focuses on understanding the tour destination through readings, discussions, and research on topics such as the regional industries, climate, crops, culture, economics, food, geography, government, history, natural resources, and public policies. For follow-up, course focuses on presentations by students, report writing, and reflection. Students enrolled in this course intend to register for 496 the following term or have had taken 496 the previous term.""Tour and study at international sites relevant to disciplines of industrial technology, biological systems engineering, agricultural systems technology, and agricultural engineering. Location and duration of tours will vary. Trip expenses paid by students. Pre-trip preparation and/or post-trip reflection and reports arranged through 495."Application of six sigma philosophy to advance product design and process control. Application of value steam mapping to the existing manufacturing system to develop future continuous improvement plans. Application of Taguchi Parameter design methodologies for optimizing the performance of manufacturing processes. Application of Taguchi Tolerance Design methodologies for product design."Exploration and analysis of current safety and public health issues impacting society. The focus will be on topics that impact individuals in work, public, and home environments.""Risk analysis and management focuses on developing a risk oriented pattern of thinking that is appropriate for today's complex world. The tools that will be gained in this course will be helpful in recognizing, understanding, and analyzing hazards and risks in modern complex systems.""A technical paper draft based on the M.S. thesis or creative component is required of all master's students. This paper must be in a form that satisfies the requirements of some specific journal and be ready for submission. A technical presentation based on M.S. thesis or creative component is required of all master's students. This presentation must be in a form that satisfies the normal presentation requirements of a professional society. The presentation itself (oral or poster) may be made at a professional society meeting or at any international, regional, state, or university conference/event as long as the presentation content and form conforms to normal expectations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."A discipline-related problem to be identified and completed under the direction of the program adviser. Three credits required for all nonthesis master's degree students."Keys to starting a good MS thesis or PhD dissertation project. Learning how to formulate research problems. Discussion of broader impact, review of literature, identifying knowledge gaps and needs, long-term goals, research hypotheses, objectives, rationale and significance, and approaches for accomplishing research objectives. Preparation and communication of research proposal and project in different formats. Using peer review and responding to feedback.""Techniques for evaluating learners, facilities, programs, and staff utilizing theories for developing measurement instruments. Outcomes assessment is emphasized.""A definition of the faculty role in technology and engineering disciplines, including strategies for dealing with programs, personnel, and constituencies are presented. Leadership skills involving team formation, team operation, and conflict resolution are addressed.""Basic concepts, trends, practices, and factors influencing curriculum development, techniques, organization and procedures. Emphasis will be given to program and course development."Graduate student experience in the agricultural and biosystems engineering departmental teaching program.One semester and one summer maximum per academic year professional work period.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."A technical paper draft based on the dissertation is required of all Ph.D. students. This paper must be in a form that satisfies the requirements of some specific journal and be ready for submission. A technical presentation based on the dissertation is required of all Ph.D. students. This presentation must be in a form that satisfies the normal presentation requirements of a professional society. The presentation itself (oral or poster) may be made at a professional society meeting or at any international, regional, state, or university conference/event as long as the presentation content and form conforms to normal expectations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""An audience oriented, broad-based, team-taught survey of the performing arts which emphasizes theatre and includes segments on television, radio, film, dance, and music."An introduction to Theatre focusing on its relationship with society throughout history."Study and practice of fundamentals of vocal production: breathing, quality, articulation, projection, and expressiveness for the performing artist.""Choreography, rehearsal, and performance in campus dance concerts and/or musical theatre productions.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Practice in various aspects of technical theatre production.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Theory and practice in fundamentals of acting."Standard structure and procedures, historical overview of performing arts production including the design and creation of scenery, costumes and lighting.""Theory, analysis, and interpretation of play scripts for production.""Progresses from production of scenes to fully developed one-act plays. Emphasis on action, staging, writing, analytical reading, workshop criticism, and individual conferences."Theory and practice of techniques of acting with emphasis on character and scene analysis."Theory, history and practice of musical theatre techniques. Designed to develop the musical theatre performance skills of singers, dancers, and actors.""Theory, history and practice of musical theatre techniques. Designed to develop the musical theatre performance skills of singers, dancers, and actors.""Theory and practice of make-up and hair-styling techniques for the performing arts: Theatre, Opera, Dance, Television and Film. Lab required.""Principles of oral interpretation: practice in analysis, in reading aloud of literary selections, and in reader's theatre.""Tools, materials, and techniques of planning, constructing and painting of performing arts scenography. Basic principles of lighting technology. Technical drawing for performing arts production.""An exploration of the elements, principles and art of theatrical design."Intensive application of the principles introduced in 365. In-depth study and practice of the graphic skills of rendering and drafting.Studies in Theatre Design and Production.Special topics related to costume design.Special topics related to scenic design.Special topics in lighting design.Special topics in sound design.Special topics in stagecraft.Special topics in costume draping and patterning.Special topics related to advanced makeup.Special topics related to stage management.Special topics related to technical direction.Special topics related to Arts Management.Analysis and practice of period scenes."Theory, techniques, and practice of directing."Practical and theoretical experience in directing the stage play."Focuses on the art and craft of specific areas of theatrical design. Each semester the student will focus on one or two of the following: scenic, costume, or lighting design."Theatre history from ancient times to 1800.Theatre history from 1800 to present."Practicum in production with ISU Theatre, with opportunities for specialization within various areas. Required: Approval of written proposal."Only one independent study enrollment within the department is permitted per semester.   No more than 9 credits in Thtre 490 may be counted toward graduation.Supervised application of theatre in professional settings.Topics may include the following:.Topics may include the following:.Topics may include the following:.Topics may include the following:.Topics may include the following:.Topics may include the following:."General principles; drug disposition; drugs acting on the nervous, cardiovascular, renal, gastrointestinal, and endocrine systems.""Pathogenesis of human microbiological foodborne infections and intoxications, principles of toxicology, major classes of toxicants in the food supply, governmental regulation of foodborne hazards. Assessed service learning component.   Only one of FS HN 419 and FS HN 519 may count toward graduation.""Effects of microbial growth in foods. Methods to control, detect, and enumerate microorganisms in food and water. Foodborne infections and intoxications.""Study of toxicological diseases of animals emphasizing clinical recognition, circumstances of poisoning, differential diagnosis with clinical and laboratory data, therapeutic procedures, preventive management and public health implications. Supplemented with case-based materials.""Principles of toxicology governing entry, fate, and effects of toxicants on living systems. Includes toxicokinetics and foreign compound metabolism relative to toxification or detoxification. Fundamentals of foreign compound effects on metabolism, physiology, and morphology of different cell types, tissues, and organ systems.""Provides demonstrations or laboratory experience in the application of methods used in toxicology, including safety procedures, calculation and data analysis, teratologic and morphologic evaluation, cellular/molecular toxicological techniques, electrophysiologic measures, in vitro enzyme induction/biotransformation, neural and behavioral toxicology testing.""Presentation of a seminar about a current topic in toxicology as part of a weekly series of seminars by graduate students, faculty, and guest lecturers from off campus.  Graduate student speakers will meet with the instructor at least one week prior to their formal presentation.""Principles of cancer biology and cancer etiology will be integrated with the impacts of diet on cancer development and prevention.  Contributions of research with humans, animals, cultured cells and cell free systems will be included.  The importance of dietary contaminants, macronutrients and micronutrients will be examined with an emphasis on the strength of the evidence and mechanisms of action.""Survey of approaches used by toxicologists in government and industry for generating, enforcing and complying with laws and regulations. Regulatory policies and decisions making.  Toxicological risk assessment and risk analysis.  Taught online only.""Basic principles of toxicology. Toxicants in the food supply: modes of action, toxicant defense systems, toxicant and nutrient interactions, risk assessment. Assessed service learning component.   Only one of FS HN 419 and FS HN 519 may count toward graduation.""Study of toxicological diseases of animals emphasizing clinical recognition, circumstances of poisoning, differential diagnosis with clinical and laboratory data, therapeutic procedures, preventive management and public health implications. Supplemented with case-based materials.""Mechanisms of action, metabolism, sources, remediation/detoxification, risk assessment of major foodborne toxicants of current interest, design of HAACP plans for use in food industries targeting foodborne toxicants, discussion of toxicants from a food defense perspective.  Offered online only.""Advanced study of current problems and issues in toxicology. Emphasis on problem solving utilizing clinical, epidemiological, and laboratory resources.""Fate and significance of pesticides in soil, water, plants, animals, and the atmosphere.""General principles; drug disposition; drugs acting on the nervous, cardiovascular, renal, gastrointestinal, and endocrine systems.""Statistical methods commonly used in epidemiology and human and animal health studies.  Overview of cohort studies, case-control studies and randomized clinical trials.  topics include inference procedures for disease risk factors, analysis of time-to-event and survival data, analysis of longitudinal studies of disease progression and health status, approaches to handling missing data, and meta-analysis.  Examples will come from recent studies of physical and mental health, nutrition and disease progression in human and animal populations. Use of statistical software: SAS or R."Risk assessment principles as applied to biological systems. Exposure and effects characterization in human and animal health and ecological risk assessment.  Risk analysis frameworks and regulatory decision-making.  Introduction to quantitative methods for risk assessment using epidemiological and distributional analysis.  Uncertainty analysis.  This course is available only by distance."A multi-instructor course covering major topics in cell structure and function, including:  universal features of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, types of utilization and conversion of energy, genetic control of cell shape and functionality, internal organization of cells, communication between cells and their environment, development of multicellular systems.  Students have to write a term paper."Contact individual faculty for special projects or topics. Graded."Topics of current interest in food microbiology, including new foodborne pathogens, rapid identification methods, effect of food properties and new preservation techniques on microbial growth, and mode of action of antimicrobials.""Provides an overview of rapid microbial detection methods for use in foods. Topics include historical aspects of rapid microbial detection, basic categories of rapid tests (phenotypic, genotypic, whole cell, etc.), existing commercial test formats and kits, automation in testing, sample preparation and ""next generation"" testing formats now in development."Cellular and molecular mechanisms of carcinogenesis."Principles of insecticide toxicology; classification, mode of action, metabolism, and environmental effects of insecticides."Lecture and discussion participation on current topics in toxicology.  An 80% attendance is expected to satisfactorily complete the course.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Graduate research projects performed under the supervision of selected faculty members in the graduate Toxicology major.Research.Application of economic analysis methodologies to evaluate transportation projects. Multi-modal approaches to evaluate impacts of transportation investments and maximize economic efficiency while considering equity and other social issues related to investment options.Advanced topic for creative component report in lieu of thesis.Provides an overview of current transportation issues; speakers provide seminars on a variety of timely transportation topics."Orientation to the university focusing on student transition, acclimation to university, exposure to campus resources, and student success strategies.  Exploration of topical issues associated with specific learning community or program focus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Orientation to the university focusing on student transition, acclimation to university, exposure to campus resources, and student success strategies.  Exploration of topical issues associated with specific learning community or program focus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Orientation to the university focusing on student transition, acclimation to university, exposure to campus resources, and student success strategies.  Exploration of topical issues associated with specific learning community or program focus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Orientation to the university focusing on student transition, acclimation to university, exposure to campus resources, and student success strategies.  Exploration of topical issues associated with specific learning community or program focus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Orientation to the university focusing on student transition, acclimation to university, exposure to campus resources, and student success strategies.  Exploration of topical issues associated with specific learning community or program focus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Orientation to the university focusing on student transition, acclimation to university, exposure to campus resources, and student success strategies.  Exploration of topical issues associated with specific learning community or program focus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Acceptance/participation in appropriate learning community.  Continued exploration of university services, strategies for student success, leadership, and acclimation to university.  Exploration of issues associated with learning community focus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Acceptance/participation in appropriate learning community.  Continued exploration of university services, strategies for student success, leadership, and acclimation to university.  Exploration of issues associated with learning community focus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Acceptance/participation in appropriate learning community.  Continued exploration of university services, strategies for student success, leadership, and acclimation to university.  Exploration of issues associated with learning community focus.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Comprehensive approach to personal career development providing students with the skills and structure to make informed choices about their major and career path.  Self-exploration of interests, skills, values, and personality as related to the world of work using a variety of techniques; exploration of majors and occupations; model for major and career decision-making and career goal implementation; exposure to effective job search and interviewing skills and resources."Orientation to the university for Carver Academy students focusing primarily on transition and acclimation to the university environment. Individual and group identity development. Life and legacy of George Washington Carver.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Introduction for Carver Academy students to resources at ISU to supplement classroom learning. Exploration of multicultural communities and leadership opportunities at ISU.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Exploration of individual leadership styles, career opportunities, personal values as they relate to career possibilities, and issues facing women in the workplace.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Leadership and peer mentor training for Carver Academy students who will be serving as peer mentors in Carver Academy. Definitions and analysis of diversity in academia. Academic portfolio preparation and career exploration.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Seminar topics prepare sophomore and upper-class students to pursue research and internship experiences in science, technology, engineering and math fields.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Independent study on topics of an interdisciplinary nature. Intended primarily for freshmen and sophomores."Introduction to academic research focusing on the initial stages of research with lessons on how to define a research idea, formulate a research question or hypothesis, gather, critique, analyze and synthetize the literature on the subject of inquiry, and understand and be able to apply a number of methodologies to gather data.""Continuation of research preparation focusing on methodologies and the relevance to specific research questions, data collection and analysis processes, and scientific research writing and presentation.  Lessons on how to determine appropriate methodology and design a scientific protocol, gather and analyze data, and understand findings so as to effectively report and present findings and conclusions."For students serving as peer mentor first-year seminar leaders under faculty supervision. Development of course facilitation and peer leadership skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.For students serving as peer mentor first-year seminar leaders under faculty supervision. Development of course facilitation and peer leadership skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.For students serving as peer mentor first-year seminar leaders under faculty supervision. Development of course facilitation and peer leadership skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.For students serving as peer mentor learning community leaders under faculty supervision.  Development of peer mentor abilities through an understanding of personal strengths and how strengths interact with leadership style.  Exploration of connections between strengths and mentor role will be coupled with learning community peer mentor training to interweave identified strengths with those of the students they serve.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.For students serving as leaders in Hixson Seminar or MVP Seminar under faculty supervision. Development of course facilitation and peer leadership skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.For students serving as leaders in Hixson Seminar or MVP Seminar under faculty supervision. Development of course facilitation and peer leadership skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.For students serving as leaders in Hixson Seminar or MVP Seminar under faculty supervision. Development of course facilitation and peer leadership skills.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Development of public speaking, group facilitation, and peer leadership skills.  Exploration of issues associated with student transition to college, university organizational structures, and processes associated with student matriculation.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Exploration of issues of race and ethnicity in the United States."Comprehensive approach to choosing and applying to graduate school including drafting and finalizing the personal and research essay, understanding graduate funding, preparing for the grad interview, standardized exam preparation, and conversations with faculty and graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Continuation of graduate school preparation focusing on transitioning, navigating the critical first year, succeeding in graduate school through to the completion of the PhD, and conversations with faculty and graduate students.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Independent study on topics of an interdisciplinary nature. Intended primarily for juniors and seniors."Analysis and observation of urban morphology and culture with urban design projects set in local cities of the United States. Students with learn skills to observe and interpret urbanism as they develop processes for designing cities concerned for both physical form, ecological principles and human activity.""Students develop proposals for urban design interventions in an international context at multiple scales using investigation, analysis, observation, and interaction.  Field trips.""Focus on the historical role of planning and urban design in the shaping of North American cities and regions, from the colonial period to the late twentieth century. Examine the legacy of planning and design by exploring the intersection of geographic space, politics, and policy. Investigate the factors and the processes that produce the built environment.""Introduction to the ways that urban designers think about the city with a focus on how history, theory, and a wide range of contextual factors inform urban design practice.  Field trip.""Study of contemporary theoretical texts that address the process of urbanization and the challenges of urban design in a global context.  Course will be conducted in a combination of lecture and seminar formats and requires graduate level readings, discussions and research.""An exploration of contemporary urban design methods derived from significant urban projects and (re)development initiatives. Selected case studies to articulate and evaluate methods for implementing urban design goals and objectives in a variety of urbanized contexts. Case studies will build on a combination of analytical research, lectures, student presentations, and field trips.""An introduction to visual representation tools and techniques for generating and communicating urban design concepts and analytical research. Projects and exercises will utilize traditional and contemporary approaches to drawing, modeling, and mapping, as well as desktop publishing tools for print, web, and presentation graphics. Field trip.""This course examines how political-economic forces shape the contemporary built and social environments and the way urban designers respond to these forces. The course highlights various methods urban designers use to create change and, in turn, how these affect stakeholders and communities. Students develop critical awareness of existing social, political and economic systems; understand the impact of the decision they make, and the methods they use, on the city and these systems.""History and current lives of the Latino/a peoples in the United States, including Mexican, Cuban, Puerto Rican, Dominican, and South and Central Americans, as well as information specific to Iowa Latino/as, will be covered. Through readings, class discussions, writing assignments, and guest speakers, students will acquire accurate information and a solid understanding of the US Latino/a population and cultural perspectives. Elements of Latino/a culture to be covered include historical, sociological, educational, psychological, economic, and political facets.""Historical and cultural heritage of Latinas/os in the United States. The histories of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, and other Latin American peoples in the U.S. emphasizing political and cultural convergence and congruencies.""Examination of the social, historical, economic and political experience of varied Latino ethnic groups in the U.S. - primarily focusing on Mexican, Puerto Ricans, and Cubans.""A study of the religious behavior and attitudes expressed in the literature of Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans and other groups of people living in the U.S. who trace their ancestry to the Spanish-speaking countries of Latin America.""Political institutions, processes, and contemporary issues. Selected countries examined intensively to illustrate generalizations. Role of parties, military, church, human rights, women, environmental issues, interest groups, ideology, and globalization.""An introduction to the literature of Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans and other Latino/a sub-groups. Special emphasis on themes such as ethnic relations and comparisons with EuroAmerican literary traditions.""Historical, political, and social contexts of psychological and mental health constructs in terms of their validity and utility for use in Latino/a people in the U.S.  Unique aspects of psychological functioning particular to Latino/a peoples in the U.S.""Comparative history of the civil rights and ethnic power movements (African American, Chicano, American Indian, Puerto Rican, among others) in the U.S. from World War II to the present. Topics include institutional foundations, leadership, gender and racial dynamics, and the convergences and divergences of these differing ethnic struggles for rights."Independent study under supervision of instructor.   No more than 3 credits may count towards the U.S. Latino/a Studies certificate.An elective course designed to educate the veterinary student about issues of relevance to companion animal population and shelter medicine and welfare.Introduction to the veterinary profession and the various career opportunities available.A continuation of the Veterinarian in Society series. The course covers selected topics on moral and ethical issues affecting the practice of veterinary medicine."A continuation of the Veterinarian in Society series. This course will focus on helping students develop their communication, leadership, team building and conflict resolution skills."A continuation of the Veterinarian in Society series. This course will emphasize veterinary law."Canine physical examination; basic behavior, animal handling and restraint; medical record keeping."Seminars and case presentations on selected clinical subjects by fourth-year students of the College of Veterinary Medicine. Attendance is required for a passing grade.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Evaluation of morphologic anatomy of the dog and cat utilizing clinical imaging methods - radiography, ultrasonography, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging and nuclear imaging. Emphasis will be placed on normal radiographic anatomy."General principles of surgery of companion animals.General principles of surgery of companion animals.Small animal surgery.Elective course in equine surgery."Anesthetic equipment, agents, and procedures for domestic animals."Principles and techniques of medical and surgical ophthalmology.Elective course in diagnosis and management of cardiac diseases. Emphasis on interpretation of electrocardiography.Elective course in management and diseases of pet birds and exotic species.Elective course in feline internal medicine.Elective clinical assignment in oncology.Elective course in small animal and equine nutrition.Elective course in dermatology.Elective course in veterinary practice under the guidance of veterinarians in approved practice settings. Maximum of 6 credits in 2 credit increments.External practical experiences in the fourth year curriculum for additional professional development of the veterinary student.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Clinical experience in husbandry, nutrition and training of exotic animals in a zoo environment. Students will get instruction and learn the application of the clinical skills required when dealing with exotic animals, including the hands-off visual examination obtaining historical and clinical information from zookeepers, and the use of immobilization drugs for patient exams. Students will learn the common medical disorders of exotic species and treatment techniques."Clinical diagnosis and treatment of diseases of small animals."A 2-week elective rotation at an animal shelter/humane society that works with the public to place pets in homes. This rotation will encompass population medicine (medicine, surgery, intake, adoption, behavior and temperament, neglect and cruelty) that animal shelters deal with on a daily basis. The selected animal shelter/humane society must have a veterinarian(s) on staff and be approved by the course coordinator. More than one VCS 437 may be taken upon approval of the course coordinator."Rotating assignments through multiple sections within the Veterinary Medical Center.Elective clinical assignment in rehabilitation.Orthopedic diseases of the equine.Clinical diagnosis and treatment of diseases of small animals.Clinical diagnosis and treatment of diseases of equine."Clinical rotation in neurology with an emphasis on neurolocalization, disease processes, use of diagnostics in medical and surgical neurology and treatment options. Exposure to neurosurgical techniques.""Hands on experience with equine veterinary diagnostic skills related to theriogenology, medicine, surgery, radiology, and ophthalmology.""Essentials of diagnostic image interpretation. Essentials of radiobiology, radiation therapy and protection from radiation."Pre-laboratory presentations and laboratories introduce the student to anesthetic and surgical principles and techniques that can be applied to all animal species.This laboratory introduces the student to anesthetic and surgical principles - and techniques that can be applied to all animal species. Consists of only neutering humane society animals throughout the laboratory.This laboratory introduces the student to anesthetic and surgical principles and techniques that can be applied to all animal species. Provides a broader range of surgical experiences throughout the laboratory.8 weeks. Continuation of surgical laboratory experience.  Techniques and advanced principles learned are applicable to all animal species.8 weeks. Continuation of surgical laboratory experience.  Techniques and advanced principles learned are applicable to all animal species. Consists of only neutering humane society animals throughout the laboratory.8 weeks. Continuation of surgical laboratory experience. Techniques and advanced principles learned are applicable to all animal species. Exposure to more advanced surgical techniques with most surgical principles.8 weeks. Continuation of surgical laboratory experience. Techniques and advanced principles learned are applicable to all animal species. A second repeat for students with a special interest in small animal surgery."Study of clinical dermatological problems via computer-aided instruction, case simulations, and/or lectures. Clinical management of cases presented to Veterinary Medical Center."Clinical assignment in small animal medicine.Clinical assignment in small animal medicine.Clinical assignment in soft tissue surgery.Clinical assignment in orthopedic surgery.Clinical assignment in equine medicine.Clinical assignment in equine surgery."A 2-week surgical emphasis, elective rotation at a humane society that addresses the issues facing veterinarians and non-veterinary humane society personnel who deal with small animal overpopulation issues. Each section can be taken for credit once.""A 2-week surgical emphasis, elective rotation at a humane society that addresses the issues facing veterinarians and non-veterinary humane society personnel who deal with small animal overpopulation issues. Each section can be taken for credit once.""A 2-week surgical emphasis, elective rotation at a humane society that addresses the issues facing veterinarians and non-veterinary humane society personnel who deal with small animal overpopulation issues. Each section can be taken for credit once.""A 2-week surgical emphasis, elective rotation at a humane society that addresses the issues facing veterinarians and non-veterinary humane society personnel who deal with small animal overpopulation issues. Each section can be taken for credit once."Clinical assignment in veterinary radiology.A discussion of advanced topics in small animal internal medicine.Clinical experience in hospital based general practice.Clinical assignment in equine ambulatory practice.Elective clinical assignment on the principles and practices of normal and therapeutic horseshoeing and equine foot care.Clinical assignment in small animal and large animal anesthesiology.Elective clinical assignment with emphasis on pain management.Clinical assignment to provide supervision of hospital cases requiring intensive care and including emergency cases.Clinical assignment in ophthalmology.Elective clinical assignment in veterinary radiology."Elective clinical assignment in animal reproduction. Equine, Small Animal, Comparative, and Food Animal reproduction only.""Elective comparative clinical assignment in Theriogenology with caseload management in Food Animal, Equine, Small Animal and Small Ruminants sections. Rotation through these different sections will depend on the caseload (by species)and include routine breeding management, semen collection and cryopreservation in different species, advanced laparoscopic and non-surgical procedures for insemination and embryo flushing/transfer, pregnancy diagnosis as well as management of reproductive emergencies.""Elective clinical assignment in Equine Theriogenology involving both mare and stallion breeding management, cool-shipped semen preparation and semen cryopreservation, embryo transfer, foaling of high-risk pregnant mares as well as normal mares, breeding soundness exams of the mare and stallion, treatment of retained fetal membranes and neonatal care.""Elective clinical assignment in Small Animal Theriogenology. Primary reproductive management in the canine involving breeding management of the bitch and stud dog, advanced surgical and non-surgical insemination using fresh or frozen semen, infertility case management for the male and female. High risk pregnancy management, whelping and neonatal care case management as required."Clinical assignment in small animal surgery split between soft tissue surgery (one week) and  orthopedic surgery (one week).Clinical assignment in small animal surgery split between soft tissue surgery (one week) and  orthopedic surgery (one week).Clinical assignment in small animal surgery split between soft tissue surgery (one week) and  orthopedic surgery (one week).Elective clinical assignment in cardiology."Assignments in equine, small animal, and large animal anesthesiology. Experience includes case work-up, management and recovery. Understanding of the unique physiology and potential complications of anesthetized patients. Pharmacology of commonly used drugs. Specific protocols and management for both field and general anesthesia.""Assignments in equine, small animal, and large animal anesthesiology. Experience includes case work-up, management and recovery. Understanding of the unique physiology and potential complications of anesthetized patients. Pharmacology of commonly used drugs. Specific protocols and management for both field and general anesthesia.""Assignments in equine, small animal, and large animal anesthesiology. Experience includes case work-up, management and recovery. Understanding of the unique physiology and potential complications of anesthetized patients. Pharmacology of commonly used drugs. Specific protocols and management for both field and general anesthesia."Elective clinical assignment in intensive care."All aspects of veterinary dentistry, prophylaxis, endodontics, and orthodontics.  This course is an on-line course.""Clinical rotation in equine dentistry with an emphasis on routine equine dental examinations, specialized equipment, and corrective procedures. Offered only offered for one 2-week rotation.  Enrollment is limited.""Independent Study in veterinary medicine focusing on basic / translational research or learning issues. Enrollment in this course is not appropriate for clinical experiences in the Veterinary Medical Center or extramural experiences in clinical veterinary practice (i.e., preceptorships)."8 weeks.  Predeparture orientation for group study abroad. Cultural considerations for the study abroad experience and a conversational language introduction. Out of class work may be assigned.Seminars and case presentations on selected subjects by fourth year students of the College of Veterinary Medicine. Completion of a seminar presentation is required for graduation.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."International Preceptorships and Study Abroad Group programs. Provides opportunities for students to be involved in applied clinical, production, and/or research experiences in international locations. The course consists of 40 hour per week experiential learning opportunities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Special topics in Ophthalmology."International Preceptorships and Study Abroad Group programs. Provides opportunities for students to be involved in applied clinical, production, and/or research experiences in international locations. The course consists of 40 hour per week experiential learning opportunities."Detailed principles of clinical radiology with particular reference to radiographic interpretation."Course designed to discuss and perform advanced surgical procedures in soft tissue, orthopedic and neurological surgery.  Minimally invasive surgical procedures and organ transplantation will be included.""Innovative techniques in microvascular, thoracic, gastrointestinal, neurological and reconstructive surgery will be investigated."Principles of general medicine. A study in depth of factors that contribute to the development of clinical signs as related to the pathogenesis of disease.An advanced study of metabolic diseases.Graduate Level Research."This course is designed to meet the needs of veterinary students who will practice in an environment in which the use of Spanish for accurate client communication is essential which includes much of our food animal industry in the state of Iowa.  This is not a traditional Spanish language course. To be successful, students taking the course should have a basic knowledge of Spanish pronunciation, grammar and syntax.""The fundamentals of how clinical, diagnostic, production and financial information is obtained and used by production animal operations will be presented.  Students will acquire skills to create and use spreadsheets for manipulating and summarizing data.  They will also acquire knowledge of where to find inexpensive and readily available resources with information on how to use spreadsheets and other software.  Students will also have the opportunity to work with different record keeping programs used by swine, beef and dairy operations.""The role of the veterinarian in the management of animal health and production in populations including evaluation tools in dairy and beef cattle herds, beef feedlots and swine herds will be described.  Provides veterinary students with a starting point to understand the principles and techniques that are the basis of food-animal population health diagnosis management programs. Course available on-line, attendance is not required.""A continuation of the Veterinarian in Society series. The objective of this course is to develop knowledge of the fundamental principles of animal welfare, in terms of science, ethics and cultural components.""One week course at Iowa State University.  An introduction to Food Supply Veterinary Medicine covering  overviews of major animal agriculture species (beef, dairy, pork, sheep and camelid), production systems, behavior, welfare, handling and restraint, examination techniques, biosecurity, epidemiology and food safety. Visits to production units are utilized to introduce the application of clinical skills. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""This course will meet for two hours once each week of the Spring Semester. The first hour will be traditional lecture and the second hour will be a combination of student projects, labs and demonstrations of applied clinical procedures. Bovine embryo transfer and closely related topics such as: female reproductive physiology, estrus synchronization, semen sexing and reproductive disease will be emphasized. In addition, several class periods will be devoted to the use of ultrasound for diagnosis of reproductive and non-reproductive conditions.""Preparation for competition in the Intercollegiate Animal Welfare Judging Contest. Development of critical appraisal and oral communication skills in regard to animal welfare. Animal behavior, physiology, health and performance parameters, basic husbandry, housing and preventive care will be explored for select farmed, companion and exotic species. Optional field trips.""Advanced coverage of concepts related to collection, manipulation, analysis and reporting of information used by dairy farms and their consultants. Hands on experience with Dairy Comp 305 and PCDart as well as other dairy management and information software.""Advanced coverage of concepts related to collection, manipulation, analysis and reporting of information used by dairy farms and their consultants. Hands on experience with Dairy Comp 305 and PCDart as well as other dairy management and information software."Independent records analysis and reporting of information used by dairy farms and their consultants. Hands on experience with Dairy Comp 305 and PCDart.Independent records analysis and reporting of information used by dairy farms and their consultants. Hands on experience with Dairy Comp 305 and PCDart.Independent records analysis and reporting of information used by dairy farms and their consultants. Hands on experience with Dairy Comp 305 and PCDart."Discussion, lectures and laboratories to assess the quality and significance of medical evidence in making informed decisions about the treatment of individual animals and animal populations.""Bacterial, viral, parasitic, and nutritional diseases of domestic poultry and gamebirds; biosecurity, immunization, and management procedures to prevent poultry diseases.""An A to Z introduction to proven veterinary practice management methods and strategies. The student will follow a detailed hands-on workbook describing most of the processes and procedures of day to day veterinary practice. The class content will be composed of class room discussions, didactic presentations, a practical workbook, ancillary handouts, and both in and out of class assignments.""Introduction to basic camelid medicine, including anatomy, behavior, restraint, handling, husbandry, herd health, common diseases, surgical conditions, and anesthesia protocols.""Formal exposure to the entrepreneurial and business skills necessary to own and operate a successful veterinary practice or other small business opportunity. Personal finance, marketing, human resource management, general accounting, site assessment, location demographics, practice valuation, and a host of other issues which must be considered when purchasing or starting a new business are covered.  Class instruction will be delivered by successful practice and business owners with examples from real world experience.""Bovine rectal palpation techniques will be repetitively taught in 7 four-hour sessions. Students will also learn techniques of epidural anesthesia, artificial insemination, and ultrasonic imaging. University-owned cattle will be used. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred. No Wednesday section in Spring semester.""Advanced coverage of concepts related to collection, manipulation, analysis and reporting of information used by swine production companies.  Production, financial, diagnostic and clinical data will be covered in the course.  Hands-on experience with computer software and information systems used in swine production will be provided.  Students will learn to objectively evaluate the validity of information that is presented to them and also be able to make practical and useful recommendations regarding the types of information tools that can/should be used.  The students will learn what software and information systems are available and be able to critically evaluate them.""Advanced course in production animal medicine with emphasis on government, industry or veterinary practice settings. Forty hours clinical experience per week. Assignments will be preceptorships with a practicing veterinarian, governmental agency and/or production unit. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Advanced course in production animal medicine with emphasis on mixed animal practice with food animal emphasis in a veterinary practice settings. Forty hours clinical experience per week. Assignments will be preceptorships with a practicing veterinarian, governmental agency and/or production unit. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Advanced course in production animal medicine with emphasis on general mixed animal veterinary practice settings. Forty hours clinical experience per week. Assignments will be preceptorships with a practicing veterinarian, governmental agency and/or production unit. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Advanced course in production animal medicine with emphasis on government agency or food processing company in veterinary practice settings. Forty hours clinical experience per week. Assignments will be preceptorships with a practicing veterinarian, governmental agency and/or production unit. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""The Great Plains Veterinary Education Center (GPVEC), located on the US Meat Animal Research Center (USMARAC) near Clay Center, Nebraska offers one week clinical training in production animal medicine species. All sections will be held at GPVEC. Students need to provide their own transportation to the site and overnight stays at or near GPVEC are required.""The Calving Elective provides an opportunity to expand knowledge and experience in all phases of calving management. The program is structured around normal calving operations at USMARC. The GPVEC and USMARC veterinary staff will make an effort to include students in veterinary activities that take place during the Calving Elective. The opportunity exists for assistance in diagnosis, treatment, and management of many commonly encountered situations in the dam and calf. Students are encouraged to make every effort to become involved in USMARC calving activities. Direct involvement includes routine husbandry activities beyond those involving traditional veterinary roles which are expected of the student.""The Bull Breeding Soundness Examination Elective involves training in all phases of the examination, collection, and semen evaluation for up to 200 herd bulls and/or sale bulls as recommended by the Society for Theriogenology. Chuteside training and hand-on experience are the primary training techniques for this elective with informal discussions held during the performance of the breeding soundness examinations.""Evaluation of production techniques and production efficiency including ration and feeding management, health management program development and evaluation, environmental management, quality assurance, feedlot necropsy and microbiology techniques, and break even analysis. Approaches to solve seasonal health problems within the management objectives for different feed yards are the strong emphasis of this elective. Students may have the opportunity to follow cattle to a packing plant to learn the methods for tracking animals into the food chain, identifying production problems that are not diagnosable at the feedlot level, and monitoring beef quality assurance. Biosecurity activities will be emphasized and practiced.""This is a hands-on elective in which students participate in the weaning management at the U.S. Meat Animal Research Center. Students will be involved with processing, feeding, finding, and treating sick calves. Additionally, students will be introduced to developing weaning rations and managing feed delivery. Students will also learn how to develop vaccination and treatment protocols and each student will have as an objective the development of their own vaccination and treatment protocol template.  As time allows, students will visit commercial feed yards and cover production management topics.""The Pregnancy Examination Elective involves students, the GPVEC faculty, and USMARC personnel during pregnancy examination. Activities involve rectal examinations for pregnancy, collecting data and entry into the CowCalf5 computer software program to evaluate the reproductive performance of the herd. This elective is designed for students who have some palpation experience and are interested in honing their skills. Ultrasonography may be utilized by students based on adequate time and interest. Pregnancy Examination occurs during yearly fall herd work at the USMARC, therefore, speed and accuracy will be stressed, rather than basic technique. Introduction into rectal examination for reproductive use is stressed during the Bovine Reproduction Elective.""The Lambing Elective involves students with the USMARC lambing crew and GPVEC faculty in observations, assistance with delivery when necessary, and routine lambing duties. Students will work with veterinary personnel in sheep necropsy and health surveillance. Activities and objectives closely parallel to those listed in the Calving Elective. Self study material will be provided covering topics such as pre-breeding and breeding, pregnancy diagnosis, pregnant ewe management, pre-lambing ewe/lambing management, feeder lamb health and nutrition management, and replacement ewe and ram management."The Equine Dentistry Elective provides the opportunity for students to expand their knowledge and experience related to equine dentistry. The rotation consists of lectures on topics relevant to equine dental care and hands-on laboratories during which students practice routine dental care procedures on USMARC horses. Equine Dentistry will involve both lecture and lab time at about equal shares."The Preconditioning Elective provides the opportunity for students to expand their knowledge and experience in the development and implementation of calf preweaning programs. Students will assist GPVEC and USMARC personnel during routine processing of USMARC spring-born calves prior to weaning. GPVEC faculty will also lead discussions related to vaccine and dewormer protocols, preweaning nutrition, and other topics related to preparing beef calves for weaning."The Gomer Bull Surgery Elective is designed to give students interested in food animal surgery an opportunity to practice their surgical skills by performing penile translocations and epididymectomies on USMARC teaser bull candidates. Lectures specific to gomer bull surgery as well as other topics related to food animal surgery will be presented during this elective."This elective provides students the opportunity to gain hands-on experience related to the daily activities of an intensively managed confinement swine unit.   Rotation participants will work closely with USMARC Swine Unit personnel as they complete their daily routines in the farrowing and breeding areas of the USMARC Swine Unit and will participate in piglet delivery, neonatal pig processing, artificial and natural breeding, necropsies, and other activities as they arise.""This elective provides the opportunity for students to develop their skills in the area of health and nutritional management of sheep immediately before and after weaning.   The rotation consists of lectures on pre- and post-weaning nutrition, clinical parasitology, and prevention and control of common ovine infectious diseases.  Hands-on experience during the week will take place at the USMARC Sheep Unit and will consist of walk-through and hand-on examinations of recently weaned lambs, treatment of sick lambs, inspection of weaning pen environment, investigation of herd outbreaks, and post mortem examination of all sheep mortalities.""The Ultrasound Pregnancy Examination Elective involves students, the GPVEC faculty, and USMARC personnel during pregnancy examination of USMARC yearling heifers.  Activities involve transrectal ultrasonographic examinations for pregnancy, collecting data and entry into the CowHerd/CowCalf computer software program to evaluate the reproductive performance of the herd.  This elective is designed for students who have some ultrasound experience and are interested in honing their skills.  This elective occurs during yearly fall herd work at the USMARC, therefore, speed and accuracy will be stressed, rather than basic technique.  Didactic instruction may include several topics in cow herd health, nutrition, management and reproductive decision making.""This elective provides students opportunity to assist cow-calf operations with calving in Nebraska, South Dakota or other locations. These operations typically calve 300-1,000 head each spring. Calving experience is not required, but a good understanding of working around cattle is necessary. Students will be actively participating in the day to day, normal calving routine including detecting and sorting off Ì¢‰âÂÅÒspringersÌ¢‰âÂåù, calf Ì¢‰âÂÅÒwatchÌ¢‰âÂåù, detecting when intervention is needed and assisting delivery, caring for and monitoring newborns and dams for good health and early disease detection, tagging/processing new calves, treating calves needing intervention and performing other routine calving chores. Students need to provide their own transportation to the site and overnight stays at or near the production sites are required. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Study of toxicological diseases of animals emphasizing clinical recognition, circumstances of poisoning, differential diagnosis with clinical and laboratory data, therapeutic procedures, preventive management and public health implications. Supplemented with case-based materials.""Epidemiology and ecology of disease in populations. Disease causality and epidemiologic investigations. Issues in disease prevention, control, and eradication. This course is available on campus and by distance.""Lectures will emphasize current production and evaluation techniques for beef cow/calf operations and students will learn to conduct and critically assess production and financial data using a standardized approach.  Lab activities will allow students an opportunity to work with individual beef cattle producers to identify areas for improving profitability, health, and sustainability.  Each semester's content builds on the material from the previous semester. Enrolling in the class for multiple semesters will be encouraged.""Lectures will emphasize current production and evaluation techniques for beef cow/calf operations and students will learn to conduct and critically assess production and financial data using a standardized approach.  Lab activities will allow students an opportunity to work with individual beef cattle producers to identify areas for improving profitability, health, and sustainability.""Lectures will emphasize current production and evaluation techniques for beef cow/calf operations and students will learn to conduct and critically assess production and financial data using a standardized approach.  Lab activities will allow students an opportunity to work with individual beef cattle producers to identify areas for improving profitability, health, and sustainability.""Lectures will emphasize current production and evaluation techniques for beef cow/calf operations and students will learn to conduct and critically assess production and financial data using a standardized approach.  Lab activities will allow students an opportunity to work with individual beef cattle producers to identify areas for improving profitability, health, and sustainability.""Lectures will emphasize current production and evaluation techniques for beef cow/calf operations and students will learn to conduct and critically assess production and financial data using a standardized approach.  Lab activities will allow students an opportunity to work with individual beef cattle producers to identify areas for improving profitability, health, and sustainability.""Clinical diagnosis and treatment of diseases of swine, beef and dairy cattle, and small ruminants.""General principles of normal reproductive functions in addition to environment, management and diseases causing disturbances in reproduction."Elective clinical assignment in techniques of embryo transfer. Primary species studied will be bovine but equine and small ruminant embryo transfer will be covered during appropriate seasons. Enrollment is limited to four students per two week session. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred."Practical experience and training in necropsy, recognition of gross lesions, diagnostic sample collection and test selection for the diagnosis of infectious, toxic, nutritional and  metabolic diseases of small animal and production livestock species through exposure to diagnostic cases submitted to the ISU Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory."Case materials are used to develop diagnostic questions and to better understand the value of diagnostic tests.  Testing methods and interpretation of diagnostic tests are coupled with sampling strategy and objective assessment of available evidence to provide accurate diagnosis."Elective clinical assignment in Food Animal and Small Ruminant Theriogenology involving male and female breeding soundness exams, dystocia management, advanced diagnostic procedures, surgical and nonsurgical insemination programs in small ruminants, and semen cryopreservation. Medical and surgical correction of reproductive disorders in cattle and small ruminants."Elective course in food animal and camelid field services. Students will assist university veterinarians in delivering health care and production management services to the ISU livestock farms and other livestock farms in the local area. Focus will be on delivery of individual animal care and establishment of best practices for herd management of production systems at the university and in the region. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred."Clinical assignment focused on the management of food animal and camelid medicine and surgery cases. Specific instruction in clinical evaluation of cases coupled with appropriate diagnostic testing and therapeutic intervention will be emphasized. Additional instruction will be provided in disease prevention, intensive care and management of food animal and camelid species. Particular emphasis will be placed on appropriate on-label and extra-label drug usage in food animal species. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Preceptorship course in swine production medicine with emphasis on herd management, production analysis, and problem solving. Forty hours clinical experience per week. Assignments will be preceptorships with a practicing veterinarian and/or a production unit. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Two week clinical rotation in swine production medicine.  Students will be assigned to take the lead in investigating field based client cases with supervision of the instructors.  Development of critical thinking skills that will allow students to apply concepts of herd management, production analysis, economic analysis, and disease prevention in addressing client cases.  Variable amounts of travel to farm sites will be required with the potential for rare overnight stays. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Two-week senior elective that will focus on the economics of animal disease in cow/calf operations. Evidence based medicine and epidemiological principles will be used in investigation of disease outbreaks. Extensive partial budgeting used. Students will complete at least two disease investigations involving outbreaks in commercial cow/calf operations and communicate their findings to the class, the herd owner, and local practitioner. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Advanced course in beef production medicine with emphasis on herd management, production analysis, and problem solving. Forty hours clinical experience per week. Assignments will include preceptorships with a practicing veterinarian and/or a production unit. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Two week advanced clinical rotation in beef production medicine. Fifteen hours recitation/discussion and 20 hours clinical experience per week. This course is designed to expose students to cow-calf and feedlot production concepts. The activities scheduled for the rotation depend greatly on the time of year. Whenever possible, the class incorporates field trips. Students should anticipate that travel, including overnight stays, may be required. These field trips can vary in length from several hours to several days and may include weekends. Typically, 3-4 days of the rotation are spent at the Great Plains Veterinary Education Center, Clay Center, NE. Students should, therefore, plan accordingly and contact the instructor, immediately, if they anticipate a conflict. Students should not schedule Grand Rounds during this rotation. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Two week course in dairy production medicine combining class time with multiple on-farm visits to learn various management aspects (DHIA, DC305 & PC Dart record analysis, calf rearing through lactating cows, reproduction programs, udder health and milk quality, biosecurity, welfare, nutrition and cow comfort) for a wide variety of dairy operations. Students will learn the latest in dairy management by reviewing current topic articles and gain experience in farm evaluation through a group project. Fifteen hours recitation/discussion and 20 hours clinical experience per week. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Advanced course in dairy production medicine with emphasis on herd management, production analysis, and problem solving. Forty hours clinical experience per week. Assignments will include preceptorships with a practicing veterinarian and/or a production unit. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Survey of small ruminant production systems, common management practices, and disease processes of small ruminants.  This course is intended to give the student a background in small ruminant medicine. Herd health, disease monitoring and prevention, and typical management systems will be emphasized in lecture.""The course is designed for both the pre-veterinary and animal science majors who have an interest in production animal health, disease prevention methods, epidemiology of economically important agents, and the ecology of currently important pathogens found in North American livestock industries. It will focus on disease prevention principles for individuals and large production population systems."Application of microbiological procedures to the diagnosis of infectious diseases.Capstone seminar for the food safety minor. Case discussions and independent projects about safety issues in the food system from a multidisciplinary perspective."Focus on dairy nutrition and balancing rations from the calf to the adult, lactating cow. Introduction to different feedstuffs and forage varieties to determine those that are best suited to bovine diets. This course is held the week immediately prior to the start of the fall semester. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Advanced course in investigating dairy herd problems relating to milk quality or nutrition.  Milk quality and nutrition troubleshooting will be taught through the combination of lecture and on-farm investigations. Students will combine lecture knowledge, data acquired from on-farm investigations and record analysis to generate management plans. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Two week clinical rotation in small ruminant production medicine. Field trips (including overnight stays) will be incorporated when possible. Topics to be covered include small ruminant industries (milk, meat, and fiber), milk quality, nutrition, reproduction, and disease management of small ruminants. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""International Preceptorships and Study Abroad Group programs. This course will provide opportunities for students to be involved in applied clinical, production, and/or research experiences in international locations. The course consists of 40 hour per week experiential learning opportunities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Discussion, lectures and laboratories to assess the quality and significance of medical evidence in making informed decisions about the treatment of individual animals and animal populations.""Bacterial, viral, parasitic, and nutritional diseases of domestic poultry and gamebirds; biosecurity, immunization, and management procedures to prevent poultry diseases.""Formal exposure to the entrepreneurial and business skills necessary to own and operate a successful veterinary practice or other small business opportunity. Personal finance, marketing, human resource management, general accounting, site assessment, location demographics, practice valuation, and a host of other issues which must be considered when purchasing or starting a new business are covered.  Class instruction will be delivered by successful practice and business owners with examples from real world experience.""Study of toxicological diseases of animals emphasizing clinical recognition, circumstances of poisoning, differential diagnosis with clinical and laboratory data, therapeutic procedures, preventive management and public health implications. Supplemented with case-based materials.""ANOVA, Linear Regression, Model Selection, Mixed Models, ANCOVA, Repeated Measurement Analysis, MANOVA, Nonparametric Methods, Diagnostic Test Evaluation, ROC Curve Analysis, Generalized Linear Models, Logistic Regression, Survival Analysis, Cox Proportional Hazards Regression. This course is available on campus and by distance.""Epidemiology and ecology of disease in populations. Disease causality and epidemiologic investigations. Issues in disease prevention, control, and eradication. This course is available on campus and by distance.""Designing, conducting, and analyzing outcomes from field-based studies, including cross-sectional, case-control, cohort, and clinical trials with categorical outcomes. This course is available on campus and by distance."Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Techniques. Includes: fermentation, protein isolation, protein purification, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, NMR, confocal microscopy and laser microdissection, Immunophenotyping, and monoclonal antibody production. Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Advanced study of current problems and issues in toxicology. Emphasis on problem solving utilizing clinical, epidemiological, and laboratory resources."Necropsy techniques of animals with emphasis on gross and microscopic lesion description and microbiological diagnosis of disease in food animals.Risk assessment principles as applied to biological systems. Exposure and effects characterization in human and animal health and ecological risk assessment.  Risk analysis frameworks and regulatory decision-making.  Introduction to quantitative methods for risk assessment using epidemiological and distributional analysis.  Uncertainty analysis.  This course is available only by distance."Two-week senior elective that will focus on the economics of animal disease in cow/calf operations. Evidence based medicine and epidemiological principles will be used in investigation of disease outbreaks. Extensive partial budgeting used. Students will complete at least two disease investigations involving outbreaks in commercial cow/calf operations and communicate their findings to the class, the herd owner, and local practitioner. Biosecurity policies require documentation of your presence in the USA 5 days immediately prior to the start of class if international travel has occurred.""Topics in medicine, surgery, theriogenology; beef, swine, dairy, or sheep production medicine.""International Preceptorships and Study Abroad Group programs. This course will provide opportunities for students to be involved in applied clinical, production, and/or research experiences in international locations. The course consists of 40 hour per week experiential learning opportunities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""A detailed study of swine diseases emphasizing the pathogenesis and diagnosis of swine respiratory, enteric, reproduction, metabolic, and septicemic diseases. Course activities include interpretation of diagnostic case reports and development of diagnostic plans for specific disease objectives.""Initial antimicrobial selection for infectious diseases of domestic animals. The antimicrobial drug groups will be examined, stressing pharmacokinetics, minimal inhibitory concentrations, and the use of these parameters to select appropriate compounds and dosages for maximum efficacy.""Detailed overview of applied techniques used in swine production medicine; production modeling and record analysis, facility design and management, analysis of competing intervention options, design and evaluation of therapeutic and vaccination strategies, quality control procedures and food safety. Course activities include interpretation of diagnostic case reports and development of diagnostic plans for specific disease objectives."Case-based applied learning that relates to the basic science courses. Emphasis on early integration of basic and clinical science concepts.Structure and function of the immune system in animals.Bacteria and fungi of veterinary importance with emphasis on mechanisms of disease production and laboratory diagnostic procedures.Basic principles of animal virology. Pathogenesis of viral infections. The nature and ecology of viruses of veterinary and zoonotic importance."Fundamental epidemiology, zoonotic diseases, occupational health, food safety, other public health topics."An overview of the history of veterinary medicine focused primarily on disease-specific events.  A review of the historical aspects of the veterinary profession's accomplishments in the discovery of the etiological origins of disease and their subsequent control will provide students with insights that are applicable to understanding and solving today's animal and human health challenges."Infectious diseases (bacterial, viral, and mycotic) of non-human primates, birds, ruminants, cold-blooded animals, marine mammals, and carnivores.*Spring only offered to UNL students.""Epidemiology and ecology of disease in populations. Disease causality and epidemiologic investigations. Issues in disease prevention, control, and eradication. This course is available on campus and by distance.""Etiology, epidemiology, laboratory diagnosis, regulatory control and preventive medicine aspects of the infectious diseases of swine, sheep, goats, cattle and horses.""Discussions, lectures, exercises and field trips related to veterinary public health.""Introduction to preventive medicine, public health and the principles of applied epidemiology within the working atmosphere of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention."Elective course in zoo veterinary practice under guidance of approved veterinarians."International Preceptorships and Study Abroad group programs. This course will provide opportunities for students to be involved in applied clinical, production, and/or research experiences in international locations. The course consists of 40 hour per week experiential learning opportunities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""The general principles of bacteriology, immunology and virology will be discussed.  The structure and function of bacteria and viruses, the mechanisms of pathogenesis, and the host response to infectious agents will be reviewed. Vaccines, their failures, and new developments in vaccine development will be explored.""The fundamental concepts of bacterial and bacteriophage genetics including mutagenesis, mechanisms of both vertical and     horizontal genetic information transfer, gene regulation, and genetic approaches to study complex cellular processes. Review and     discussion of research literature to examine experimental design, methodology, and interpretation of both historical and     contemporary relevance to microbial genetics.""Nature of the immune system and its role in health and disease.   Credit for either V MPM 520 or 575, but not both may be applied toward graduation.""Overview of commensal microbiota in the health and well-being of vertebrates. Topics include diversity of intestinal structure, microbial diversity/function, innate immune development, community interactions and metabolic diseases associated with alterations of the intestinal microbiome.""Epidemiology and ecology of disease in populations. Disease causality and epidemiologic investigations. Issues in disease prevention, control, and eradication. This course is available on campus and by distance."Pathogensis and control of zoonotic diseases. Factors influencing transmission and survival of pathogenic microorganisms in the environment.Basic concepts and contemporary topics in genetic regulation of livestock immune response and disease resistance.Sessions in basic molecular biology techniques and related procedures.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes genetic engineering procedures, sequencing, PCR, and genotyping.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: immunophenotyping, ELISA, flow cytometry, microscopic techniques, image analysis, confocal, multiphoton and laser capture microdissection.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: Agrobacterium and particle gun-mediated transformation of tobacco, Arabidopsis, and maize, and analysis of tranformants.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Includes: two-dimensional electrophoresis, laser scanning, mass spectrometry, and database searching.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Includes: metabolomics and the techniques involved in metabolite profiling. For non-chemistry majoring students who are seeking analytical aspects into their biological research projects.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."An examination of humoral and cellular immune function as well as the interaction of the cells and factors of the immune system that result in health and disease. MICRO 475L optional.   Credit for either Micro 575 or V MPM 520, but not both, may be applied toward graduation.""Bacteria associated with diseases of vertebrates, including virulence factors and interaction of host responses.""Procedures used in isolation and identification of pathogenic bacteria, including molecular and genetic techniques used in research.""Principles of animal virology. Biology of viruses associated with diseases of veterinary importance, including mechanisms of pathogenesis.""International Preceptorships and Study Abroad Group programs. This course will provide opportunties for students to be involved in applied clinical, production, and/or research experiences in international locations. The course consists of 40 hour per week experiential learning opportunties.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""A written report based on laboratory research, library reading, or topics related to the student's area of specialization and approved by the student's advisory committee."Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Advanced study of virus host-cell interactions. Molecular mechanisms of viral replication and pathogenesis.Current topics in molecular aspects of immunology: T and B cell receptors; major histocompatibility complex; antibody structure; immunosuppressive drugs and viruses; and intracellular signaling pathways leading to expression of genes that control and activate immune function."Review of current concepts in specific areas of microbial pathogenesis including the genetic basis for bacterial disease, genetic regulation and control of virulence factors and their mechanisms of action, and host-pathogen interactions at the cellular and molecular levels. The application of microbial genetics to understanding pathogenesis will be included.""Current topics and literature in cellular immunology. Topics include thymocyte development and selection, T cell interactions with antigen presenting cells, and lymphocyte effector functions.""Study of current knowledge related to host pathogen interactions during persistent and chronic infections by bacteria, viruses and parasites."Colloquia or advanced study of specific topics in a specialized field.Colloquia or advanced study of specific topics in a specialized field.Colloquia or advanced study of specific topics in a specialized field.Student and faculty presentations.Basic pathology with emphasis on disease in animals and introduction to diseases by system."Analysis of genome, RNA, and protein data using computer technology to answer biological questions on topics ranging from microbial diversity to human health. An introduction for students in the life sciences to the fields of genomics, bioinformatics and systems.""Biology and host-parasite relationships of major groups of animal parasites, and techniques of diagnosing and studying parasites."Response to injury by each body system.Parasitic diseases of domestic animals and their control.Clinical applications of the basic sciences taught concurrently in the fall semester of the second year curriculum in veterinary medicine."8 weeks, offered first half semester only. Discussion of prefixes, suffixes, and roots (mostly from Latin and Greek) that comprise medical terms.""Introductory exploration of pathology as a medical discipline. This includes study of disease mechanisms via an introduction to general pathology topics (cell degeneration, necrosis, disturbances of growth, disturbances of blood flow, inflammation, neoplasia) and organ system-specific response to injury.""Description, interpretation, and techniques for cellular preparations from tissues and body fluids.""Principles of clinical hematology, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis in domestic animals."Practicum in postmortem examination and diagnosis."Methodology in clinical chemistry, hematology and cytology; practice in interpretation of laboratory data."8 weeks. Predeparture orientation for group study abroad. Cultural considerations for the study abroad experience and a conversational language introduction. Out of class work will be assigned.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."International Preceptorships and Study Abroad Group programs. This course will provide opportunities for students to be involved in applied clinical, production, and/or research experience in international locations. The course consists of 40 hour per week experiential learning opportunities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introductory exploration of pathology as a medical discipline. This includes study of disease mechanisms via an introduction to general pathology topics (cell degeneration, necrosis, disturbances of growth, disturbances of blood flow, inflammation, neoplasia) and organ system-specific response to injury.""Study of principles of teaching and learning as they relate to veterinary medical education. These include: theories of learning, analyzing content/learners/context, identifying goals, identifying appropriate instructional strategies (specific to medical education), matching assessment processes to goals and strategies, common curricular approaches and decision-making processes in medical education, and the scholarship of teaching and learning for veterinary medical educators."Basic pathology with emphasis on disease in animals and introduction to diseases by system.Contact hours are (0-3 to 0-9). A laboratory experience in the technical and applied aspects of veterinary parasitology."Laboratory procedures and clinical interpretations with emphasis on hematology, cytology, and clinical chemistry.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Contact hours are (0-3 to 0-9). Diagnosis of lesions in biopsy specimens; classification of neoplasms. Course includes rotation through departmental biopsy service and review of selected cases from departmental archives.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.Contact hours are (0-3 to 0-9). Necropsy techniques of animals with emphasis on gross and microscopic lesions and diagnosis.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Ethical conduct in biomedical research, criticism, writing, and adherence to regulations.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Pathology of the respiratory, reproductive, endocrine, musculoskeletal, and cardiovascular systems. Emphasis on pathogenesis and anatomic pathology correlated with interpretive clinical pathology where appropriate.""Pathology of the integumentary, urinary, digestive, lymphoid, and nervous systems and special senses. Emphasis on pathogenesis and anatomic pathology correlated with interpretive clinical pathology where appropriate."Response to injury by each body system.Parasitic diseases of domestic animals and their control."International Preceptorships and Study Abroad Group programs. This course will provide opportunities for students to be involved in applied clinical, production, and/or research experiences in international locations. The course consists of 40 hour per week experiential learning opportunities.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."Course for departmental graduate research.Course for departmental graduate research.Course for departmental graduate research.Course for departmental graduate research.Course for departmental graduate research.Description and interpretation of microscopic lesions and clinical pathology data collected from cases of natural and experimental disease.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.A seminar of graduate research at the time of thesis or dissertation defense.A comprehensive examination in the diagnostic description and interpretation of case materials relevant to veterinary pathology and areas of specialization for the graduate degree preliminary examination.A comprehensive examination in the diagnostic description and interpretation of case materials relevant to veterinary pathology and areas of specialization for the graduate degree preliminary examination.A comprehensive examination in the diagnostic description and interpretation of case materials relevant to veterinary pathology and areas of specialization for the graduate degree preliminary examination.A comprehensive examination in the diagnostic description and interpretation of case materials relevant to veterinary pathology and areas of specialization for the graduate degree preliminary examination.A comprehensive examination in the diagnostic description and interpretation of case materials relevant to veterinary pathology and areas of specialization for the graduate degree preliminary examination.Pathologic changes in blood constituents of domestic animals."Cellular and molecular mechanisms of cell injury, cellular responses to injury, and inflammation."Cellular and molecular mechanisms of carcinogenesis."Study of current knowledge related to host pathogen interactions during persistent and chronic infections by bacteria, viruses and parasites.""Discuss and define similarities and differences of varied host responses to infectious challenge. Learning will focus on comparative aspects of the host response and the unique aspects of immunity from different organisms, while highlighting molecular and mechanistic similarities of pathogen recognition, response and resolution.""The pathophysiology, methodology, and clinical application of laboratory medicine.""Study of microscopic lesions in laboratory animals with emphasis on description, etiology, pathogenesis, and diagnosis."Course restricted to graduate program within the department.Course restricted to graduate program within the department.Course restricted to graduate program within the department.Course restricted to graduate program within the department.Course restricted to graduate program within the department."Forecasting, wind measurement and analysis, site placement, aerodynamic principles associated with blade design, power generation technologies, power electronic topologies used in wind energy conversion, collection circuits, and grid operation with high wind penetration.""Systems approach to wind turbine design, manufacturing, installation, integrated with wind economics and policy issues. Topics include manufacturing practices used to produce wind turbines, construction practices, sensing and inspection technologies used in monitoring wind farm health, and the impact of policy making on the wind energy industry.""Advanced design, control, and operation of wind plants. Topics include electromechanical energy conversion systems, aerodynamic and aeroelastic loads, optimal control of wind farms, life cycle management strategies, tall tower design, and prediction of component residual life.""Advanced study of a research topic in the field of wind energy, science, engineering, and policy.""Identifying current wind energy research issues and conducting components of the research cycle in real-time, including proposal development, investigation/analysis/discovery, publication and presentation, ethical behavior, and leadership.""Half semester course. Examines the socialization process in the United States and how our perspectives are formed. An introduction to patriarchy, sexism, and ally development are explored. Skills to enhance communication and understanding among women and men will be developed.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to the interdisciplinary field of Women's Studies. Contemporary status of women in the U.S. and worldwide from social, economic, historical, political, philosophical and literary perspectives. Analysis of intersection of gender, race, class, and sexuality. Subject matter includes work, health, sexuality, and violence. Foundation for the other courses in the program.""Study of contemporary and historic lesbian cultures and communities from a US and international perspective.  Addresses issues of race, class, gender and sexuality as they intersect with the formation of lesbian identities.  Explores who identifies as lesbian and how that dis/enables political resistance and formation of community.""Interdisciplinary study of issues relating to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer identities in the U.S.  Attention will be given to race and socioeconomic class.""Study of women in a range of cultures, depending on faculty specialization. Special emphasis on women in development seen in postcolonial context.""The interrelationships of women and science and engineering examined from historical, sociological, philosophical, and biological perspectives. Factors contributing to under-representation; feminist critiques of science; examination of successful strategies.  Does not satisfy biology major advanced credit requirements.""Writing and reading interpretive fiction written by women. Emphasis on stories that embody a female literary life, gender-specific ways of creating characters and conflicts, analytical reading and writing, workshop criticism and shared commentaries. Includes multi-modal projects.""Women's relationships with the earth, non-human nature, and other humans. The course explores the connections between societyÌ¢‰âÂ‰ã¢s treatment of women and nature; origins of ecofeminism and how it relates to the science of ecology, conventional and sustainable agriculture as well as how ecofeminism relates to other branches of feminist philosophy. Evaluation and critique of modern science, technology, political systems and SOLUTIONS will be included.""Economic theories of discrimination. Analysis of the economic problems of women and minorities in such areas as earnings, occupations, and unemployment. Public policy concerning discrimination. Poverty measurement and antipoverty programs in the U.S."Examines how understanding and enactment of gender identity is shaped by communication. Verbal and nonverbal   communication across various contexts including personal relationships and the media.  Explores discourse of social movements aiming to transform cultural definitions of gender."Survey of how the media and popular culture portray gender and sexualities and the impact on individuals and society. Images of women, men, transgender as well as heterosexual, non-heterosexual and others. Studies both historical and emerging images in the media in terms of stereotypes and positive images.""How the biological fact of sex is transformed into a system of gender stratification. The demographics and social positions of women and men in the family, education, media, politics, and the economy. Theories of the social-psychological and sociological bases for behavior and attitudes of women and men. The relationship between gender, class, and race.""Examination of socially constructed and idealized images of manhood, the nature of social hierarchies and relations constructed on the basis of imagery, ideologies, and norms of masculinity. Theories on gender (sociological, psychological, and biological). Particular attention given to theory and research on gender variations among men by race, class, ethnicity, sexual orientation, physical ability and age.""This course will examine historical and contemporary barriers to and opportunities for women's leadership in a variety of contexts, including professions and public service. It will examine theories of women's leadership, gender differences in leadership styles, and the perceptions and expectations about women's leadership. Multiple perspectives of women's leadership will be highlighted through lectures, readings, videos, guest speakers and group work.""Examines the status of women in various religions, feminist critiques of religious structures and belief systems, and contemporary women's spirituality movements.""A critical, theoretical examination of the oppression of women, especially as it relates to issues of race, class, and sexual orientation. How concepts such as sex and gender, self and other, nature and nurture, complicate our understanding of what it means to be a woman. Historical and contemporary feminist philosophers addressing topics such as violence, sexuality, pornography, political power, family structure and women's paid and unpaid labor.""Historical and thematic survey of literature by and about women. May include autobiographies, journals, letters, poetry, fiction, and drama.""Literature of American Indian women writers which examines their social, political, and cultural roles in the United States. Exploration of American Indian women's literary, philosophical, and artistic works aimed at recovering elements of identity, redescribing stereotypes, resisting colonization, and constructing femininity.""Biology of human reproduction, including reproductive systems, hormones, and endocrinology of pregnancy, presented from a clinically-oriented perspective. Reviews health-related conditions such as infertility, sexually-transmitted diseases, and complicated pregnancy.""Literature by women and/or dealing with the images of women, e.g., study of individual authors or related schools of authors; exploration of specific themes or genres in women's literature; analysis of recurrent images of women in literature.""Survey of theory and research related to major biological, interpersonal, and cultural issues affecting girls' and women's psychological development and behavior.""Economic, social, political and cultural roles of Women of Color in the U.S. Includes literary, philosophical, and artistic expressions. Myths and realities explored."Literary portrayals of gay and lesbian lives and relationships from many different genres.  Attention to changing definitions and representations of sexual orientation and gender identity over time."Readings, discussions, and papers in English.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Readings, discussions, and papers in English.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women writers, cinema, or contemporary theory. Three credits: English, open to all students. Four credits: Required for German concentration credit, supplementary readings and compositions in German.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women writers, cinema, or contemporary theory. Readings, discussions, and papers in English.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women writers, cinema, or contemporary theory. Readings, discussions, and papers in English. May not be counted as a prerequisite.""Chronological and topical survey of the status of women and men, focusing on sex and gender issues in the Ancient Mediterranean world; study of constructs of the female and the feminine. Readings from ancient and modern sources.  Emphasis on ancient Greece, Rome, and Egypt.""History of women's relationship to the fields of science, technology, and medicine, as students and professionals, consumers, subjects and patients, family members, workers and citizens. Concentrates especially on 19th and 20th century United States, concluding with an examination of current issues of special interest to women in science, technology, and medicine."Examination of the entry and participation of women in politics in the United States and other countries including a focus on contemporary issues and strategies for change through the political process."A survey of social, economic, and political aspects of women's role from colonial era to present; emphasis on employment, education, concepts of sexuality, and changing nature of the home.""Current theories of feminism, the feminine and sexual difference. Topics in race, class, sexuality, and ethnicity as they are addressed in diverse feminisms. May include readings in lesbian, Black, postcolonial, psychoanalytic and postmodern thought."Feminist research methods and scholarship. Class collaborates on a community research and action project to improve women's lives.The ways men and women differ in using language in varied settings and the ways in which language both creates and reflects gender divisions."Race, ethnicity, class and gender distinctions and intersections lead to inequitable distributions of power, social well-being, and resources. Explores how inequities are institutionalized and how multiple identities are experienced by women in daily life.""Cross-cultural study of development utilizing both case studies and theoretical works. Explores the nature of women's roles in developing countries and the ways women and their needs have been excluded/included in development approaches, policies, and projects. Includes discussion of actual development projects as well as women's organizing.""Exploration of the foundational myths of Goddess spirituality, including historical and cross-cultural female images of the divine and their modern usage by American women.""Cross-cultural examination of the social construction of genders out of the biological fact of sex. Emphasis on non-western societies. Topics, presented through examination of ethnographic data, will include the range of gender variation, status and roles, the institution of marriage, and symbols of gender valuation.""Special and/or experimental topics in a specific discipline, e.g., women and education, women and religion, women and the law, women and science.""Selected readings of various authors, movements, eras, or genres. Readings in criticism; required research paper.""Research on women and leadership in selected content areas (e.g., business, education, politics and public service, and popular culture). Following an overview of quantitative and qualitative methods and critical analyses of journal articles on women and leadership, students will work in groups in selected content areas to research, write and present paper."Independent study on a topic in Women's Studies.Internship designed to provide an application of Women's Studies principles and methods in a workplace. To be arranged with an internal or external employer and conducted under the supervision of a member of the Women's Studies faculty.Issues of gender related to cultural environments from the Middle Ages to contemporary times in Europe and America. Feminist movement beginning in the 1970s and specifically gender issues in art that are becoming widespread in the artistic culture.Senior thesis to be independently researched and written under the supervision of a member of the Women's Studies faculty.Advanced study of current theoretical developments in Women's Studies in the U.S. and around the world. Examination of the epistemological bases of feminist scholarship.Focus on feminist interdisciplinary research methods. Analysis of contemporary issues facing feminist scholars. Students conduct original research."Race, ethnicity, class and gender distinctions and intersections lead to inequitable distributions of power, social well-being, and resources. Explores how inequities are institutionalized and how multiple identities are experienced by women in daily life.""Cross-cultural study of development utilizing both case studies and theoretical works. Explores the nature of women's roles in developing countries and the ways women and their needs have been excluded/included in development approaches, policies, and projects. Includes discussion of actual development projects as well as women's organizing.""Cross-cultural examination of the social construction of genders out of the biological fact of sex. Emphasis on non-western societies. Topics, presented through examination of ethnographic data, will include the range of gender variation, status and roles, the institution of marriage, and symbols of gender valuation.""Primary texts by women writers; historical, thematic, formal, or theoretical approaches; secondary readings; e.g., Nineteenth-Century Women Writers; American Women's Personal Narratives; Southern Women Writers of the U.S.""Special and/or experimental topics in a specific discipline, e.g., women and education, women and religion, women and the law, women and science."Feminism as a movement and feminst theory from the early modern period to the present as it relates to the writing of women's history.  Analysis of intepretations of European and U.S. women's history from patriarchal and postmodernist perspectives.Independent study on a topic in Women's Studies.Issues of gender related to cultural environments from the Middle Ages to contemporary times in Europe and America.  Feminist movement beginning in the 1970s and specifically gender issues in art that are becoming widespread in the artistic culture."Critical examination of the philosophical foundations of education that seek to challenge the status quo and advance radical educational change.  Exploration of macro-level (and some micro-level) issues relevant to educational change, in relation to how they inform practices of dissent and every day social relations.""Study of language diversity and the personal, social and political effects of diversity. Language families, attitudes toward language and language use, language and culture, multilingualism, foreign language learning, written codes, official languages, and language policy.""An interdisciplinary introduction to a world region in a state of rapid social and cultural transition. Discussion of the history, social and political institutions, arts, economy, agriculture, and environment of the new nations.""Introduction to the cinema of non-English speaking regions and cultures of the world through representative subtitled films, lectures, and readings. Topics vary according to faculty interest. Emphasis on selected national cinemas and film as a mode of cultural expression as well as on diverse cultural contexts of cinema.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women's writing, cinema, or cultural studies of a non-English speaking world culture or cultures. Readings, discussion, and written work in English.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women's writing, cinema, or cultural studies of a non-English speaking world culture or cultures. Readings, discussion, and written work in English.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women's writing, cinema, or cultural studies of a non-English speaking world culture or cultures. Readings, discussion, and written work in English.""Topics vary according to faculty interest. Author, genre or period study, women's writing, cinema, or cultural studies of a non-English speaking world culture or cultures. Readings, discussion, and written work in English.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in the liberal arts and sciences.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in world languages grades K-8.""Cross-disciplinary examination of the present and future impact of globalization with a focus on preparing students for leadership roles in diverse professional, social, and cultural contexts.  Facilitate an understanding of the threats and opportunities inherent in the globalization process as they are perceived by practicing professionals and articulated in debates on globalization. Use of a digital forum for presenting and analyzing globalization issues by on-campus and off-campus specialists.""Planning, implementation, and assessment of standards-based, student-centered, and thematic instruction in the elementary (K-8) classroom.  Special emphasis on K-8 students' communicative skills, cultural knowledge, and content learning."Theories and principles of contemporary world language learning and teaching. Special emphasis on designing instruction and assessments for active learning."Students returning from study abroad gain perspective on the personal, academic, and professional impact of their time spent abroad through readings and discussions. Students will be expected to make one presentation about the culture they experienced to an audience outside ISU.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Evaluation of instruction, lesson planning, and teaching in world languages grades K-8.""Cross-disciplinary examination of the present and future impact of globalization with a focus on preparing students for leadership roles in diverse professional, social, and cultural contexts.  Facilitate an understanding of the threats and opportunities inherent in the globalization process as they are perceived by practicing professionals and articulated in debates on globalization. Use of a digital forum for presenting and analyzing globalization issues by on-campus and off-campus specialists.""Fundamentals of youth development and the youth development profession. Through this introduction to the field, students will explore the ethical, professional, and historical elements of youth development as it has evolved toward professionalization. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Basic Grant Development and Management will introduce students to the grant-getting process and provide an overview of what happens after a project is funded. The following topics will be covered: researching funding sources, generating cutting edge ideas, assessing needs, planning a project, establishing credibility, formulating a sustainable budget, designing an evaluation plan, managing the funded project, and disseminating project results. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Adolescent development as it is related to and intertwined with family development; reciprocal influences between adolescents and their families are examined. Working with youth vis ÌøåÀå_  vis the family system will be highlighted. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Focus on the national emphasis of a strength-based or asset approach to community youth development, encompassing individual development (i.e., positive youth development) and adolescent interrelationships with environments. Emphasis is placed upon research, theory, and practice applied in communities throughout the U.S. Students will explore existing models, read theoretical and applied literature, and examine current community efforts as a basis for understanding community youth development. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Examination of the cultural context factors that affect youth from a holistic perspective within and outside the family unit. The course will provide an understanding of the cultural heritage of differing family structures and types. Students will explore the social and educational processes experienced by youth through in-depth reading, writing, discussion, critical listening, viewing of contemporary videos, and informal interviews with youth. Students will be encouraged to think critically about society and culture, gain further knowledge of how ethnic groups fit historically into society, and examine the results of how history has shaped the current cultural climate of the U.S. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."This course will help youth development professionals understand and evaluate research reports to reduce anxiety about applying research results and theories to practice. Specific emphasis will be on research and theory reports related to youth development. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Various federal and state policies designed specifically for youth. Students will examine how and why policies for youth are constructed. A guiding question that will be used to evaluate existing state and national policies is whether they contribute to, or act as, barriers to desired developmental outcomes. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Issues faced by youth today and associated risk and resiliency factors. A different topic will be presented each year, with the course rotating among participating universities. Past topics have included Youth Violence, Youth and Appearance, Adolescent Health, Global Perspectives and Volunteerism. The course may be taken more than once, as long as the content is different each time. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""This course will introduce students to the development, administration and management of youth-serving organizations. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Theoretical, methodological, and pragmatic issues involved in conducting programs and scholarship. Overview of the program development process and outcome evaluation of children and family programs. Modes of outcome scholarship and their implications for community-based programs are discussed. Students will develop knowledge through participating in a community-based project involving the practical application of program design and evaluation methods. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).""Nonthesis students creative component (e.g., a special report, capstone course, integrated field experience, annotated bibliography, research project, design, or other creative endeavor). A minimum of five credits of independent work is required on the programs of study (POS). Creative component format determined cooperation with the POS committee. (on-line course offering via Distance Education).   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only.""Introduction to the developmental period of adolescence. The theory and research of positive youth development will be the lens through which this developmental period is examined. The course will emphasize how the developmental tasks of this life stage are influenced by (and influence) family and home, school, peers, and other contextual forces. The course will help students recognize and become familiar with the major issues and transitions adolescents face as they successfully navigate this developmental stage by critically examining the theoretical and research literature. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Advanced topics. (on-line course offering via Distance Education)."Supervised practice and experience in college teaching,  research, professional experience. On-line course offering via Distance Education.   Offered on a satisfactory-fail basis only."